So I’m going to talk to you today about a different way of looking at what real is. It’s not easy to figure out what real is because we don’t really have infinite knowledge and so we’re always making some sets of presuppositions about what’s most real. And it really matters what you assume is most real because you base the decisions that you make that run the entire course of your life on those assumptions, whether you recognize it or not. And, if you get the assumptions wrong, or even if you leave them incomplete, you’re going to pay a big price for it. And.. the assumptions that we use in our culture, although they’ve enabled us to develop tremendously potent technology, are incomplete in ways that have also cost us and that are extremely dangerous.Since the scientific age began, we’ve lived in a universe where the bottom strata of reality is considered to be something that’s dead, like dirt. It’s like it’s matter; it’s objective; it’s external and there isn’t any element of it that lends any reality to phenomena like meaning or purpose. That’s all being relegated to the subjective and in some ways to the illusory but it’s by no means self-evident that that set of presuppositions is correct because we lack infinite knowledge and there’s many things about the structure of being that we don’t understand – the main one being consciousness. We can’t account for it at all and we can’t account for the role it appears to play in the transformation of potential into actuality, which is a role that’s been recognized by physicists for almost a hundred years now, and which remains one of the biggest unsolved mysteries in science.There are other ways of looking at what’s real and these other ways have some advantages and one of the advantages they have is that they protect us – knowing these other ways of operating within reality, defining reality, protect us from certain kinds of pathologies modern people are prone to.  A fair number of pathologies that stem from the assumptions of the systems they use to define reality, and one of those pathologies is a kind of a nihilistic hopelessness which is a consequence of the recognition that in the final analysis, nothing really has any meaning and because life is difficult, and that’s a meaning that you can’t escape, being forced to abandon your belief in a positive or a transcendent meaning can leave you weak at times when you really can least afford to be weak. And there’s more important pathologies that it’s opened us up to too and those are pathologies of belief and I think we saw the most horrifying examples of that – hopefully the most horrifying examples in the 20th century where people whose belief systems were shattered, at least in part, by the competition between religious and scientific viewpoints, turned in large numbers to mass movements that were in error in every way – a substitute, a moral rationale in some sense, a substitute for religious beliefs that appeared no longer tenable. And the consequence of that was, it was just about annihilation, because we came close to annihilation twice – once in the 60s and once in the 80s. And even without the totality of annihilation, we lost hundreds of millions of people as a consequence of pathological belief systems in the 20th century.So, if belief systems become pathological, they put – that pathology can pose the biggest threat possible to our very existence, and if you’re a Darwinian in any sense, you have to understand that the things that pose the biggest threats to your survival are the most real things. They have to be dealt with.Now, here’s another way of looking at things. I’ll start with the definition of this word. This word “Phainesthai” is the root word of phenomena, phenomenon. Phenomena are the things that appear to you and phainesthai means to shine forth and the phenomenologists who were interested in the shining forth of things made the presumption that the things that manifested themselves to you as most meaningful were the most real things and I think you can make a strong case that that’s actually how your brain is wired, because your brain is wired to react to things that have meaning before they construct the perceptions that you think of as objects. And the reason for that is because the meaning of things is more real, in some sense, but more important than the view of things as objects. And, so for example, a famous philosopher – psychologist division said that when you approach a cliff, you don’t see a cliff. You see a falling off place. It isn’t that it’s an object “cliff” to which you attribute the meaning of ‘falling off place,’ to. It’s the ‘falling off place’ perception comes first and the abstraction of the objective cliff, if it ever happens at all, comes much later – much later conceptually because even babies can detect cliffs and much later historically.Poets have noticed this phenomena, shining forth reality, and they’ve often associated with childhood and I think there’s good reasons for that. I think your brain is not so much of an inhibitory structure when you’re a child before it’s fully developed. And, so, there’s neurological reasons for noting it but there’s also reasons that stem from the level of lived experience. You can tell when you’re around children that they’re open to things in a way that adults aren’t. They’re wide-eyed with wonder, and adults like being around children for that reason, because although the child takes an awful lot of care, and is a terrifying object in some ways to behold if you have a relationship with the child because they’re so vulnerable. Part of the way they pay you back is they open up your eyes – your eyes that have been closed by your experience, and that have learned to shield out the things that shine forth and when you have a child, you can look through the child’s eyes again. And to me, it’s like they’re on fire in a sense; they’re like a candle or something that’s burning brightly. I think that’s also partly because we actually don’t screen out fire, we actually see fire and that’s why we can’t not look at it when it’s around.I think the same thing happens when you’re in love with someone. If it’s genuine love, because genuine love gives you a hint of what could be in the future if you could just set yourself right. You get a glimpse of what could be in the future if you fall in love with someone. You don’t get that without work but you get a glimpse of it and I think it’s because when you fall in love, and I believe this is likely a biochemical transformation, is the perceptual structures that normally stop you from seeing people because you really don’t see people, you just see shadows. The barriers are lifted temporarily and what’s really there shines through and it’s overwhelming. But to stay in that state, well, it requires a tremendous amount of moral effort, is really the right way of thinking about it.Woodsworth said about children:There was a time whenmeadow, grove and stream,The earth,and every common sightTo me did seemApparelled in celestial lightThe glory and the freshness of a dream.It is not now as it hath been of yore;Turn wheresoe’er I may,By night or day,The things which I have seen I now can see no more.Earth fills her lapwith pleasures of her own;Yearnings she hathin her own natural kind,And, even with somethingof a mother’s mind,And no unworthy aim,The homely nurse doth all she canTo make her foster-child, her inmate, Man,Forget the glories he hath knownAnd that imperial palace whence he came.And what Woodsworth means by this is that as you develop as a competent adult, which is precisely the direction towards which you should develop, much of what you are doing is actually closing in and narrowing. You’re closing in and narrowing towards a particular goal in a particular way of being and that’s necessary because as you develop, you have to develop towards a particular way of being or you don’t develop at all. And you can’t stay a child forever – that goes sour of its own accord. And so, human beings are destined to close their perceptions in, to sharpen themselves, and to focus on very little so that they can at least do that. But the price we pay for that is that we start to replace the relationship we have with untrammeled reality with the shadows that are only complex enough to let us do what we need to do and no more. And in some sense, although we become more competent, in other ways we’ve become more blind and we kind of know how this happens. That happens from the bottom up.Now this is a Magritte painting, and the painting has an obvious meaning in a sense, which is that we’re blinded even to what’s right in front of us, by the objects that we see. And we think that seeing is letting in the light, but it’s only letting in a very small fraction of the light, because we’re only capable of contemplating a small fraction of everything whenever we’re doing any particular thing. And so very much of what we’re doing is screening things out. Very much of your cortex is inhibitory, and Magritte is trying to get at that with that idea. It’s like, there’s a businessman there. He’s dressed in his uniform. He can’t see beyond the immediate thing that’s in front of his eyes.How does that happen? Well, let’s say you’re a baby. What’s the first thing you learn – you learn to build your body from the bottom up. You build your perceptual and action structures from the bottom up. You learn to move your arm. You learn to closer your hand, then you learn to do things that are practical with those abilities: you lift a spoon – well, you have to do that to feed yourself. You learn to move a plate. You learn to set the table. That’s starting to become social now because you can set the table for you and for other people. You learn to make a meal. That’s a more complex sequencing of motor activities and perceptual abilities. It’s very focused.As you continue to develop, the things you chain together become more and more complex, and.. but also more specific. You have to care for your family, which means there’s all sorts of other things you’re not doing. You have to find a good job, which almost everyone, when they’re young, experiences as the contemplation of limitation. Well, not everyone, but many people think, “oh no,” you know, “I’m going to have to settle for this role. Oh I don’t want to only be that role but it’s better to be that role than no role at all.” And maybe the way through the role to the other side is through the role, not around it. There’s no avoiding the responsibility of narrowing and shaping and specializing.Be a good parent – well that’s a sacrifice you make for the next generation. Be a good partner – the same thing. Be a good citizen. Well it’s easy for young people in particular to be skeptical of that because the old society is always corrupt and archaic and blind, and to become a member of that seems to be in part to allow yourself to adopt that same aged blindness. But that thing also educates you. It shapes every word you speak. It’s something that you have to be grateful to even in its aged archaic form. And it’s part of the necessity of human responsibility that you become a good citizen. And that means, in some sense, giving up more of what could be, at least to sustain what is. A satirical song from the late 1890s English:I am the very model ofa modern Major-General,I’ve informationvegetable, animal, andmineral,I know the kings ofEngland, and I quotethe fights historical,From Marathon toWaterloo, in ordercategorical…And the satire is, well, he has the knowledge, he’s an official functionary and it’s very difficult to do that but in the same way it’s very limited and categorical and of course an artist would object to that. But it’s better than nothing at all and that’s the alternative. Well, above that, maybe, what’s above good citizen? Because sometimes good citizen is not so good. If you were a good citizen of Nazi Germany or if you’re a good citizen of the Soviet Union or of Mao’s China, you know, you were narrowed in a particular way but – and then maybe in a necessary way but also in a very pathological way. And so it seems to be that there has to be something, even though adopting that restricted viewpoint is necessary, there has to be something above it, and I think that’s also the thing that can restore the sense you have of a true entanglement with the deepest and most meaningful realities of life.And that’s the issue of being a good person. It’s above being a citizen. It’s something else. It has something to do with the development of individuality, and I think we’re also wired for that. So it looks like we’re wired to lose what we had to specialize, but then once we’re specialized to reopen, once we’ve got the skills built into our body and then can handle reality because we’re more adapted and more fluid and more flexible, then we can start opening the doors again.And I believe your nervous system is set up to help you do that if you don’t interfere with it, if you notice. And you notice that by paying attention to the things that manifest themselves to you, that shine forth as interesting. They grab you, and where you’re grabbed is where the obscuring map you live in isn’t obscuring the reality that’s underneath. It’s like there’s a hole in the map and the light shines through that and you’re attracted to that and that will pull you along. And that’s when your interest is seized by something. That’s your nervous system doing that. You don’t do that. It’s an unconscious force. You could even say it was the world itself talking to you. And the phenomenologists did feel that way. And it’s a real phenomena – it’s not a secondary thing and you know that because you can’t live without it. You die, you stultify, you get cynical, you get nihilistic or you adopt some wild belief system if you don’t have the attachment to some genuine life-giving meaning in your own life. And it’s a hard thing to follow that because it doesn’t necessarily put you into perfect juxtaposition with society because it’s not society. It’s not being a good citizen. It’s something else. It’s also the thing that rebuilds how you would be a good citizen.The Egyptians knew about this a long time ago. They didn’t really know they do because they acted things out in drama and portrayed them mythologically because they didn’t have the capacity to articulate the ideas fully. But the Egyptians worshipped the human eye, and they worshipped the eye because they knew the eye was the thing that paid attention. Like we’re really visual creatures and your eye is automatically attracted to the things that manifest themselves or shine forth in front of you, and you have to look at them. If you pay attention to the things that shine forth, because what you’re seeing is the reality instead of the map, you’re gaining access to the real information that’s in the world. It’s not prepackaged information because that can be false. It’s the real information flowing out from the ground of being, and if you pay attention to that, it will help you move towards the goals that you’ve already established for yourself as a good citizen, that are part of the inbuilt value structure that you’ve adopted, but at the same time, it will do something else. It will lead you to transform the nature of those goals because as you pursue the thing that guides your interest, and more and more information is revealed. Then by absorbing that information, which is learning, essentially, you build yourself into a different person – a stronger and more informed person, and a more intact person. A person with more integrity and with more strength and with more direction. And at the same time, you’re differentiating your map so you’re living more and more in the real world. So as you approach your specific goal, even if it’s a culturally conditioned goal, the learning that you do along the way transforms you. And it transforms the nature of your goal.Things shine forth. There’s a reason for that, and you know that because when you’re attending to something you’re interested in, and you’re engaged in it, that’s when you’re alive. That’s when life is worthwhile. It’s so worthwhile that in those moments, you don’t even ask the question about it. The question itself goes away because the meaning that you’re united with is so powerful that it can push back the adversity that would otherwise characterize life. Nietzsche said, “the person who has a why can bear any how.” And that’s a really useful thing to know because you think, well, we’re very vulnerable creatures and our life ends catastrophically and terrible things happen and how can we bear that? And the answer to that is and always has been that you have to be in sync with something that’s beyond you, because that synchrony gives you the strength that you need to bear your terrible limitations. You see this played out. People know this. Everyone knows this. It’s just that our culture isn’t good at articulating it. We’ve lost a lot of this. We haven’t developed our knowledge about this as much as we’ve developed our knowledge of the objective world. And we’re paying for it.You see it in weird places. On the right here, there’s an old symbol at the bottom. It’s called the round chaos. When the alchemists believed that the round chaos was the thing that held what was, what the world was ultimately made of. The thing that was most real. And they conceptualized it as something like information. They thought about it as a combination of spirit and matter, and it was a combination of spirit and matter, which is what information is, in a sense, because when you interacted with it, you took some of the information and you built yourself out of it so that was the spiritual element, and you took some of the information and you built the world out of it. And that was the material element. And they thought of the reality itself as something that preceded the spiritual and the material, and that that reality was what shone forth. And that’s being dramatized and entails modern tales of transformation – the most interesting it popped up is in the Harry Potter stories where, central to the Harry Potter theme is a game called Quidditch. And in Quidditch, which is a game, the way you win the game is by playing a game that’s sort of outside the Quidditch game. You win the Quidditch game by finding, following this thing that beckons. This golden thing that glimmers and moves around you. If you catch that, then you win the game and so does your whole team. And inside that is the resurrection stone. It’s a diamond, it’s a jewel.Sweet are the usesof adversity;Which like the toad,ugly and venomous,Wears yet a precious jewelin his head.The idea is that if you follow the thing that manifests itself to you as interesting, it will lead you through adversity, lead you to do things that are difficult and as that happens, but not beyond your capacity because it’s tempered for that. What will happen is, as you hit yourself against the world, pursuing what you’re interested in, you’ll tap yourself into alignment. Your molecules, your structure, internal structure, will become non-contradictory, like the internal structure of a jewel, which is something that reflects light, that makes you hard and durable and able to bear the terrible conditions of existence without becoming corrupt.T.S. Eliot said something about this. “We shall not cease from exploration, and the end of all our exploring will be to arrive where we started and to know the place for the first time.”And that’s a five-line summary of the most remarkable elaboration of the nature of the relationship between the individual human consciousness and reality itself that’s ever been penned. And the culmination of a system of thought that’s been developing over thousands and thousands of years which we have lost and cannot properly articulate.Follow what you’re interested in. It’ll take you to adversity and then through it. It’ll transform you from a citizen into an individual and then the doors will open again. And at that point, you’re strong enough to have your life. And at that point you’re strong enough not to fall prey to pathological belief systems and work towards the destruction of things.0:00 So I suggested to you last class that human beings inhabit the world as a place of action through the lens of their social cognitive biological substructure and I made that argument on the basis of the supposition that our primary environment was actually other people and I mentioned to you, I believed that those other people are arranged in hierarchies of influence and authority or power or dominance, which is often how it’s construed and that the dominance hierarchy as a structure is at least 300 million years old, which makes it older than trees, and it’s for that reason you share the 0:01 same neurobiology to govern your observations of your position in the hierarchy as lobsters do, which is a remarkable fact! It’s remarkable that the lobster uses serotonin as the mechanism to adjudicate its status position and that modifying the serotonin function in the lobster can produce changes in its behavior, can help the lobster overcome defeat for example, which is very much equivalent to what happens to a human being when they take anti-depressants, it’s a good example of the conservation of biological structure by evolution and another good illustration of the continuity of life on Earth. It’s really amazing. But the other thing it is a testament to, is the ancient nature of the social structure. Now we tend to think of the social structure as something other than nature because society is 0:02 mythologically opposed in a narrative way, culture’s opposed to nature. It’s the town in the forest. But the town has been around a longtime so to speak and the structure of the town is also a part of nature. In that the dominance hierarchy is part of nature and because it’s so ancient you have to consider it as part of the mechanism that has played the role of selection in the process of natural selection and what seems to happen is that there is a plethora of dominance hierarchies especially in complex human communities and many of them are masculine in structure in that there are dominance hierarchies that primarily men compete in or that has been the historical norm and that some men rise to the top based on whatever the dominance hierarchy is based on and they make 0:03 their preferential mates and it’s a good strategy for women to engage in, and many sorts of female animals do precisely this, is they let the males battle it out and then pick from the top or often the dominant males , there’s no choice on the part of the females, it’s just the dominant males chasing away the subordinate males. But with humans it’s usually the case that the females have the opportunity to do at least some choosing. If you think about that, what that implies is that we have evolved to climb up dominance hierarchies and it’s not exactly that even, because there are many different dominance hierarchies, the skills you might use to climb one might not be necessarily the same skills that you would use to climb up another and so then what I would say what we have evolved for instead and 0:04 i’m still mostly speaking on the masculine edge of things, historically speaking, is the ability to climb up of the set of all possible dominance hierarchies and that’s a whole different idea, it’s like the average hierarchy across vast spans of time and I think it’s for that reason why we developed general intelligence because general intelligence is a general problem solving mechanism and it seems to be situation dependent so to speak. And of course there’s been an arms race for the development of intelligence between men and women because each gender has to keep up with the other and women have their own dominance hierarchies, there’s certainly no doubt about that and of course, now men and women, more increasingly compete within the same hierarchies and we don’t know exactly how to sort that out because it’s an extraordinarily new phenomena, but in any case because of the 0:05 permanence of the dominance hierarchy it has come to be represented in fundamental narratives because human beings, this is something that we share everywhere, it’s the thing the wall street banker shares with the Kalahari Kun bushmen who are among the genetically speaking, they seem to be close to what the most original human beings were like in Africa before the Diaspora about 50,000 ago. But both of those people, despite their vast differences, lived in a communities that have a hierarchical structure, that are composed of individuals that are embedded in a natural world, the world outside of the dominance hierarchy. That’s the standard human environment, I would say. So stories that rely on the representations of those environments and 0:06 their interactions are what you might describe as universal stories and that’s why people can understand them and I would say further and this drawing substantially on derivations of the work of Carl Jung, because I think he delved more deeply into this than anyone else so a lot of this stuff is quite Jungian in its origins. The commonality between human beings, so you have  commonalities in order communicate, axiomatic commonalities, because otherwise you have to explain everything and so there’s many things that human beings have to explain to one another. We don’t have to explain anger, we don’t have to explain jealousy, we don’t have to explain fear, we don’t have to explain pain, joy, love, etc. Those are built into us so they’re predicates of being human and you could say that those 0:07 human predicates and the standard human environment produce standard narratives and then you could say even further and this is more of a leap, I would say, is that, those who act out the role of the victory in those standard narratives are precisely the people who attain victory in life. Biologically defined they make more attractive partners but also I believe that there’s an alignment between human well-being, which is a very weak word and participation in these meta-narratives that drive success because well, do you wanna be a failure? Or a success? Well you know, it’s hard to be a success, you have to adopt a lot of responsibility and so you might be willing to take your chances as a failure but I can’t exactly, I’m not going to make the presumption that that’s going to put you in a situation other than one where you experience a lot of frustration 0:08 anger, disappointment, depression, pain and anxiety, at the bottom of the heap and so generally that’s not what people are aiming for although under certain circumstances if people don’t like responsibility and they’re willing to take their chances they might take the irresponsibility and its apparent freedoms over the necessity of thinking things through the medium and long run . Anyways we stop here, I suggested to you that one of the primary narrative representations was the known or culture or order or the explored territory or the dominance hierarchy, I think those things are basically interchangeable from a representational perspective, in the movie The Lion King, that’s represented by Pride Rock which is the central place of orientation founded on rock which is the sort of thing 0:09 that people embed their memories in, that’s why we make sculptures and gravestones, rock stands for permanent, to have rock under your feet is to be on a solid foundation, that’s a pyramid in some sense in that movie and the pyramid is topped by the King and Queen and their offspring, so that’s the divine couple, that’s one of thinking about it and Simba of course is the newborn hero. You understand that even though it’s lions and drawings of lions and animals are acting that out, it’s completely irrelevant to you that those characters happen to be animated and that what you’re watching is a fiction. So I would say to you with regards to fiction, you know you might say, well is fiction true or not? And the answer to that is, yes and no. It’s not true in that the events portrayed in fiction 0:10 occurred in the world, they didn’t but fiction is true the same way numbers are true, if you have one apple and one orange and one banana, the commonality between all of those three is “one”.  And you might say is “one”, as real as one fruit, is the abstraction “one”, as real as one fruit? And I would say it depends on what you mean by real. But representing things mathematically and abstractly gives you incredible power and you could make the case that the abstraction more real than certain phenomena that it represents! And certainly mathematicians would make that case, they say that mathematics is more real than the phenomenal world and you don’t have to believe that, mostly it’s a matter of choice but you can’t deny the fact an abstraction has enough reality 0:11 so that if you’re proficient in using it you can really change the world in insanely powerful ways! All the computational equipment you people are working are dependent on the abstractions one and zero essentially, so look at what emerges from that. So I would say in regards to fiction take someone like Dostoevsky, who is a favorite of mine by the way, I would highly recommend that you read all five of his great novels because they are unparalleled in their psychological depth. And so if you’re interested in psychology, Dostoevsky is the person for you, Tolstoy is more of a sociologist, but Dostoevsky man, he gets right down to the bottom of the questions and messes around, transformative reading, anyways. Dostoevsky’s characters, this character named Raskolnikov is a character in Crime and Punishment who is a Materialist-Rationalist I would say, 0:12 which was a rather new type of person back in the 1880’s and he was sort of taken by the idea that God was dead and convinced himself that the only reason that anyone acted in a moral traditional way was because of cowardice, they were unable to remove from them the restrictions of mere convention and act in the manner of someone who rose above the norm and so he’s tortured by these ideas, he’s a half starving law student and he doesn’t have enough to eat, he doesn’t have enough money and so he’s not thinking all that clearly either, he’s got a lot of family problems, his mother’s sick and she can’t send him much money and his sister is planning to engage in a marriage that’s loveless to someone who’s rather tyrannical who she hopes will provide the family with enough money so that he can continue in law school and they write him 0:13 brave letters telling him that she’s very much in love with this guy, but he’s smart enough to read between the lines and realizes that his sister is planning to prostitute herself in an altruistic manner and he’s not very happy with that and then at the same time as all this is happening, he becomes aware of this pawn broker who he’s pawning his last possessions to, she’s a horrible person, not only by his estimation, she pawns a lot of things for the neighborhood and people really don’t like her, she’s grasping, cruel and deceitful and resentful and she has this niece who’s not very bright, intellectually apparent, who she basically treats as a slave and beats all the time so Raskolnikov involved in this mess and half-starved and a bit delirious and possessed of these strange new nihilistic ideas decides that 0:14 the best way out of this situation, would be just to kill the pawnbroker, take her wealth, which all she does is keep it in a chest, free the niece, so that seems like a good idea, and so remove an apparently horrible and useless person from the world, free his sister from the necessity of this loveless marriage and allow him to go to law school so he gets educated and do some good for the world. One of the things that’s lovely about Dostoevsky, sometimes when one person is arguing against another or when they’re having an argument in their head, they make their opponent into a strawman, which is basically they take their opponent and caricature their perspective and try to make it as weak as possible and laugh about it. Then they come up with their argument, destroy the strawman and feel that they’ve obtained victory but it’s a very pathetic way of thinking, it’s not 0:15 thinking at all. What thinking is when you adopt the opposite position from your suppositions and you make that argument as strong as you can possible make it and then you hit your perspective against that strong iron man, not the strawman and then you argue it out, you battle it out and that’s what Dostoevsky does in his novels, the people who stand for the antithesis what Dostoevsky often believes are often the strongest, smartest, and sometimes most admirable people in the book, and so he takes great moral courage to do that, and Raskolnikov what he wanted to do, was set up a character who had every reason to commit murder, every reasonable reason, philosophically, practically, ethically, even so Raskolnikov goes and he 0:16 kills the old lady with an axe and it doesn’t go the way he expects it will, because what he finds is that post-murder Raskolnikov and pre-murder Raskolnikov are not the same people at all, they’re not even close to the same people, he’s entered an entirely different universe and Dostoevsky does a lovely job of describing that universe of horror and chaos and deception and suffering and terror and all of that, he doesn’t even use the money, he just buries it in an alley as fast as he can, then doesn’t want anything to do with it again and anyways, the reason I’m telling you all this is potentially to entice into reading the book because it is an amazing, amazing book but also because you might say well is what happened to Raskolnikov true? Are the stories in that book true, and the answer to that is well from a factual perspective clearly they’re untrue 0:17  but if then if you think of Raskolnikov as the embodiment of a particular type of person who lived at that time and the embodiment of a certain kind of ideology which swept across Europe and really invaded Russia and was actually a philosophical precursor to the Russian Revolution then Raskolnikov is more real than any one person, he’s like a composite person, he’s like a person who’s irrelevancies have been eliminated for the purpose of relating to the structure of the world and so I like to think of those things as “Meta-Real”. They’re more real than real. And of course that’s what you expect people to do when they tell about their own lives, their own day. You don’t want a factual description of every muscle twitch, you want them to distill 0:18 their experiences down into the gist which is the significance of the experience and the significance of the experience is roughly what you can derive from listening to the experience that will change the way you look at the world and act in the world, so it’s valuable information, they can tell you a terrible story because that can be valuable, because that can tell you how not to look at the world and then act, they can tell you a positive story you could derive benefit either way, which is why we like to watch stories about horrible psychopathic thugs. And hopefully we’re learning not to be like them although there are additional advantages in that you might say someone who is incapable of cruelty is a higher moral being than someone who is capable of cruelty, and I would say, this follows Jung as well, that that’s incorrect and its dangerously incorrect 0:19 because if you are not capable of cruelty you are absolutely a victim to anyone who is. So part of the reason people go watch anti-heroes and villains is because there’s a part of them crying out for the incorporation of the monster within them which is what gives them strength of character and self-respect because it’s impossible to respect yourself until you grow teeth! And if you grow teeth then you realize that you’re somewhat dangerous or somewhat seriously dangerous and you might be willing to demand that you treat yourself with respect and others do the same thing so that doesn’t mean that being cruel is better than not being cruel, what it means is that being able to be cruel and not being cruel is better than not being cruel because in the first case you’re nothing but weak and naive and in the second case you’re dangerous, but you have it under control. 0:20 And a lot of martial arts concentrate on exactly this as their philosophy of training, we’re not training you to fight, we’re training you to be peaceful and awake and avoid fights, but if you happen to have to get in one, and the philosophy is also if you’re competent at fighting that actually decreases the probability that you’re going to have to fight because when someone pushes you, you’ll be able to respond with confidence and with any luck and this is certainly the case with bullies, a reasonable show of confidence which very much equivalent a show of dominance is going to be enough to make the bully back off. The strength that you develop in your monstrousness is actually the best guarantee of peace and that’s partly why Jung believed that it was necessary for people to integrate their shadow and said that that was a terrible thing for people to attempt because the human shadow 0:21 which is all those things about yourself that you don’t want to realize reaches all the way to hell and what he meant by that was: it’s through analysis of your own shadow that you can come to understand why other people are capable and you as well of the sorts of terrible atrocities that characterized let’s say the 20th century. Without that understanding there’s no possibility of bringing it under control. When you study Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union, particularly under Stalin and you’re asking yourself well what are these perpetrators like, forget about the victims. The answer is they’re just like you! And if you don’t know that , that just means you don’t anything about people, including yourself and it means you need to discover why they’re just like you. And believe me, that’s no picnic. So that’s enough to traumatize people and that’s why they don’t do it and it’s partly why the path to enlightenment 0:22 and wisdom is seldom trodden upon because if it was all a matter of following your bliss and doing what makes you happy, everyone would be a paragon of wisdom but it’s not that at all, it’s a matter of facing the thing that you least want to face and everyone has tha , there’s this old story in King Arthur and the Knights go off to look for the Holy Grail which is either the cup that Christ drank out of at the last summer or the cup from into which the blood that gushed out from his side was poured when he was crucified, the stories vary, but it’s basically a holy object like the Phoenix in some sense , which is a representation of transformation, so it’s an ideal and so King Arthur’s Knights, who sit at the round table because they’re all roughly equal, go off to find the most valuable thing and where do you look for the most valuable thing when you don’t know where it is? Each of the knights looks at the forest 0:23 surrounding the castle and enters the forest at the point which looks darkest to him. And that’s a good thing to understand because the gateway to wisdom and the gateway to the development of personality which is exactly the same thing, is precisely through the portal that you do not want to climb through. And the reason for that is actually quite technical, and this is a Jungian Presupposition too, is that there’s a bunch of things about you that are undeveloped because they’re things you’ve avoided looking because you don’t want to look at them and there’s part of you, you’ve avoided developing because it’s hard for you to develop those parts, it’s by virtual necessity that what you need is where you don’t want to look because that’s where you’ve kept it and so that’s why there’s an idiosyncratic element of it for everyone , your particular place of enlightenment and terror is not going to be the same as yours except that they’re both places of enlightenment and terror 0:24 so there equivalent at one level of analysis and different at another. So back to fiction and what it does, it distills truth and it produces characters that are composites and the more they become composites the more they approximate a mythological character and they become more and more universally true and more and more approximating religious deities but the problem with that is they become more distant from individual experience so with literature there’s this very tight line where you need to make the character more than merely human but not so much of a God, you know one of the things that happened to Superman in the 1980’s, Superman started out , he’s got a heavenly set of and an earthly set of parents, and he’s an orphan like Harry Potter, a very common theme, when Superman first 0:25 emerged he could only jump over buildings and maybe stop a locomotive, but by the time the 1980’s rolled around he could juggle planets and swallow hydrogen bombs and he could do anything.  Well people stopped buying the Superman comics because how interesting is that? It’s like something horrible happens and Superman deals with it, and something else horrible happens and Superman deals with it, it’s like that’s dull! He turned into such archetype he was basically the omniscient, omnipotent God and that’s no fun! It’s like God wins and God wins again! So then they had to weaken him with Green kyrptonite which made him sick and red kryptonite mutated him and they had to introduce flaws into his character so there could be some damn plot! And that’s’ something to think about, there’s a deep 0:26 existential lesson in that your being is limited and flawed and fragile, you’re like the genie which is genius in the little tiny lamp, this immense potential but constrained in this tiny little living space as Robin Williams said when he played the Genie in Aladdin , but the fact that you have limitations means that the plot of your life is the overcoming of those limitations, if you didn’t have limitations well there wouldn’t be a plot and maybe there wouldn’t be no life and so maybe that’s the reason why you have to accept the fact that you’re flawed and insufficient and live with and consider it a pre-condition for being. It’s at least a reasonable idea. One of the main characters is the country, the known, the explored territory, we went over that a bit and it always has two elements 0:27 your country is your greatest friend and your worst enemy because it squashes you to conformity and demands you act in certain manner and reduces your individuality to that element that’s tolerated by everyone else and it constrains your potential in a single direction and so it’s really tyrannical but at the same time it provides you with a place to be and all of the benefits that have accrued as a result of the actions of your ancestors and all the other people you’re associated with. There’s the bad tyrant and the good king and those are archetypal figures, that’s because they’re always true and they’re always true simultaneously, which is party why I object to the notion of the patriarchy because it’s the apprehension 0:28 of a mythological trope which is that of the evil tyrant , without any appreciation for the fact that the archetype actually has two parts and the other part is the wise king, you can tell an evil tyrant story about culture, no problem, but it’s one sided and that’s very dangerous because you don’t want to forget all the good things that you have while you’re criticizing the things that are in error, that’s a lack of gratitude and it’s a lack of wisdom and its founded in resentment and its very dangerous both personally and socially. I told you that Captain Hook is a tyrant because he’s got this crocodile chasing him and the crocodile has a clock in his stomach and that’s death, well obviously, tick tick tick and it’s a crocodile and its underwater and it’s already got a taste of him so he’s being chased around by death and that makes him terrified and resentful and 0:29 cruel and bitter so he’s a tyrant and so he wants to wreak havoc everywhere and Peter Pan looks at Captain Hook and thinks why the hell should I grow up to be a tyrant and sacrifice all the potential of childhood? And the answer to that is, the potential sacrifice is itself if you don’t utilize it as you mature and you just end up as a forty year old lost boy which is a horrifying thing to behold, it’s almost as if you’re a corpse of a child, the living corpse of a child because who the hell wants a six year old, forty year old because you’re a little stale by that point and not the world’s happiest individual so, you’re potential is going to disappear because you age anyways and so you might as well shape that potential in a particular direction and at least become something no matter how limited, rather than nothing so 0:30 you know Peter Pan, and it’s a great mythological story, so, let’s talk about tyrants. Not only are they mythological figures but they exist and they tend to be deified, Stalin was, for all intents and purposes, God The Father in Soviet Russia. Although he was pretty much all the worst elements of Old Testament God, who was constantly smiting people and wiping out populations and doing all sorts of things that seem to be quite nasty. Nonetheless, people worshipped him, in many ways and he’s a representation of just exactly what goes wrong when things really go wrong, when people stop paying attention and when they all lie. Because one of the things that characterized the communist state is no one ever got to say anything they actually believed ever! And that was partly because one out of three people was an informer 0:31 which meant if you had a family of six people, two of them were informing on the government about you and that included your own children and if you were an informer, you were often amply rewarded by the state, so that if you lived in an overcrowded apartment building with three families in the same flat and if you informed on the woman down the hall that you didn’t like, she got shipped off to the old concentration camp and you got her apartment and so that was a lovely society, it only killed about thirty million people between 1919-1959, so that’s what happens when the archetypal structure gets tilted badly when people forget they have a responsibility to fulfill as citizens, as awake citizens who are capable of stating the truth and the archetype shifts so there’s nothing left of the great Father except the tyrant, let’s not have that happen. The one on the right is really interesting because consciously or unconsciously 0:32 there’s Stalin surrounded by what is, for all intents and purposes, fire! He looks like Maleficent in Sleeping Beauty when she shows up at Aurora’s Christening, she puts her arms up in the air and green fire surrounds her. It’s like he’s surrounded by fire and there’s Lenin above him who’s King of the fiery realm, that’s for sure. All the terrors that happened under the Soviet Union didn’t start under Stalin, they started under Lenin, Stalin was definitely Lenin’s legitimate son let’s put it that way. This is another example of the tyrannical element of the great Father and the sorts of things that can happen, I kind of got an evil kick out of this ad , it was quite old 0:33 it’s kitschy in some sense. I don’t think that’s something you’d ever see in a magazine, today, ten unusual stamps showing evil dictator, well fair enough! That’s what he was and that’s the consequence, that’s just a tiny bit of the consequence because the Nazi’s wiped out a very large number of people, often using compassion as a justification. So when they went after the mentally ill and the terminally ill and those whose intelligence was compromised for biological reasons and those who were too old and they basically justified it by saying that the enforced Euthanasia was merciful and that you were actually being a good person for complying with the requirements, so it’s something to think about. 0:34 More mythological representations, so there’s Hitler, as Knight of the Faith, essentially with, I suppose that’s a recreation of the Christian Holy Spirit dove, except you know it’s an eagle, which is a bird of prey and a scavenger. So that’s kind of interesting, but that’s Hitler as Knight of the blood, roughly speaking and this is a an allied war poster essentially that assimilates the Nazis to poisonous snakes and we don’t like poisonous snakes very much and it’s probably because they’ve been praying on us for approximately 20 million years because snakes and primates, humans in particular, co-evolved, so the snake is a representation of that which lies outside the comfortable domain and that can be 0:35 a snake obviously or it can be an abstract snake and it’s your enemy or an even more abstract snake is the evil in your own heart and this is going to be a bit of a leap for you but there’s this ancient idea what was developed in the west over thousands of years, far predating Christianity, that the Snake in the Garden of Eden was also Satan, which is like what the hell? It’s a very strange idea! But the reason for that as far as I can tell is that we have this circuitry that detects predators and a good representation of a predator is a snake or a monster that incorporates snake like creatures, like a dragon or a dinosaur with lots of teeth, or a shark that lives under the water and will pull you down, because I suspect a lot of our ancestors met a nasty death at the hands of Nile crocodiles while 0:36 they were in the African veld down to get some nice water so that’s the thing jumps up and pulls you under, and that happens in your own life because things jump up and pull you under and you use the same circuitry to process unknown things that upset us we once used to detect predators who were likely to invade our space and so humans beings are capable of abstraction and so you can think of the real predator that might invade your space and maybe that’s a snake or wolf or some kind of monster , and that’s pretty concrete biological, chimps have that, chimps don’t like snakes and if a chimp comes across a snake in the wild, then like a big … I don’t know what lived with chimps, I don’t know if they’re pythons but they have constrictors anyways. So maybe there’s a twenty foot constrictor and the chimp like stays a good distance away from it 0:37 but won’t leave and then it has this particular cry that it utters, that’s called a Snake “Wraa” and so it makes this noise which means something like “Holy Shit that’s a big snake!” and I actually mean that because the circuits that primates use to utter distress calls are the same circuits that we use to curse. Just so you know, that’s why people with Tourette’s syndrome swear because it’s like what’s up with that, how can you have a neurological condition that makes you swear? Well it turns out that guttural affect laden curses are mediated by a different speech circuit we share with the predator alarms of other primates, so that’s pretty cool. The chimp stands there and makes this snake noise and then all the other chimps come running and some of them stay a far ways from the snake but they’ll stand there 0:38 and watch that snake for like 24 hours! They’re fascinated by it. If you’ve handled snakes, you can understand that fascination because they’re fascinating! They’re numinous I would say. That’s the right way of putting it, numinous is a word that means intrinsically meaningful, like a fire. You can’t look away from a fire. If you’re sitting in front of fire place, you’re staring at it, and that’s because you’re all descended from the first mad chimpanzee who had some weird genetic mutations that made it impossible for him to stay from fire! It was like the first chimp arsonist! And he figured it out, well hey now he was a chimp with a stick with fire on it! That’s a mega chimp man! We have that mutation in spades and no wonder. So they have this 0:39 chimps that have never seen a snake, they’re in a cage and you throw a rubber snake in there, it’s like, BANG! They hit the roof but then they look at the snake , it’s terrifying and fascinating at the same time and you should look at the snake because you wanna know what it does and you should stay away from it because it’s a snake, so you’re kinda screwed in terms of your motivations right? One is, get the hell away, the other is don’t let thing do anything that you’re not watching, and so that’s really the reaction we have to the unknown, it’s terrifying, but we watch it, and ya know the meta-story is not only do watch it , but we go explore it, and so you might thing well back in the garden of Eden when we were living in trees, the snakes used to come eat us and our offspring, more likely and we weren’t very happy about that and we figured out how to maybe, by accident, drop a stick 0:40 on a snake and that was a good thing, because the snake didn’t like that and the next thing we learned later was to actually take a stick and whack the snake with it and you can believe the first primate who figured out that was just as popular as just as the guy who discovered fire, and so we’re pretty good at whacking snakes with sticks which is why Springfield has a snake whacking day that’s devoted to nothing but that, I don’t know if you know that Simpsons episode but it’s quite comical, so then you think of the snake as a predator and it’s the thing that invades the garden always, because you can’t keep snakes out of the damn garden and no matter how hard you try, and then you think of snakes, and then you think of meta-snakes and like a meta-snake would be also a predator but maybe that’s the predator that represents the destructive spirit of the other tribe. Because chimpanzees for example are quite 0:41 tribal and they definitely go to war with one another. And so you abstract out the idea of the predator to represent malevolence as such and then you take that one step further and you realize the worst of all evil predators is the human capacity for evil and then at that point, you’re starting to psychologize or spiritualize the idea of danger and make it into something that’s conceptual, something that’s psychological and something that is conceptual and something you can face of en masse. One of the things people had to figure out was how do you deal with danger. And so you figure out, how you deal with a specific danger but then because human beings are so damn smart, they thought what if we considered the class of all dangerous things? And then what if we considered a mode of being that was the best mode of being 0:42 in the face of the class of all dangerous things? That’s a lot better, you can solve all the dangerous problems all at once! Instead of having to conjure up a different solution for every dangerous thing and that’s basically as far as I can tell where the hero story came from and the hero story is basically there’s a community, it’s threatened by the emergence of some old evil, often represented by a dragon , that’s typical of the Lord of the Rings stories, there’s a hero often a humble guy, but not always, sometimes a knight, and he decides he will go out there and chase down the snake, or the serpent or the dragon, and maybe even in its lair, and he’ll a bunch of adventures on the way that transform him from useless, naive hobbit into sword wielding hero and he confronts the dragon and gets the gold and frees the people it had enslaved and comes back transformed 0:43 to share what he’s learned with the community and that’s the human story fundamentally and that’s our basic instinctive pattern and its represented in narratives constantly that’s partly what this, see this has meaning! You know what this means! Why? Why do you know? Well you know because it draws on symbolic representations that you already understand, you understand that a mess of toothed snakes is not a good thing and that maybe the sensible thing is to stomp them! And it’s not like you need an instruction manual to figure out what the poster means, and so that’s two different representations of Hitler, that’s sort of the pro-Hitler representation and that’s the Anti-Hitler representation and that’s the real Hitler who at this point, does not look like a very happy clam. So that’s the known, that’s culture, that’s order and 0:44 and what’s eternally juxtaposed to culture and the known and the explored and order is the unknown, and the unknown is a strange place! The unknown is actually, it’s a physical place, it’s the like the place when you’re camping and you’re around a fire, the unknown is everything outside the circle of the light and you may remember in The Lion King, when Mufasa, the King, goes up and takes Simba up to show him his territory he says, he is the king of everything the light touches , and that’s a very old idea, and you guys had no problem, that was fine, that made sense. And out beyond the light was the darkness, and that was the elephant graveyard, that was death, that was the place of death and danger, that’s where the hyena’s hung out, you weren’t supposed to go there, so Simba, because he’s a rule-breaking hero like Harry Potter, immediately goes there, 0:45 and that’s like the forbidden fruit, it’s the same sort of idea, if you want someone to do something, the best thing to do is tell them that they shouldn’t and not explain why! So for example, if I said to you at the beginning at this class, look I’ve got one rule, don’t sit in that chair, no matter what! You’d be thinking the whole year, especially if I reminded you, just what’s up with that chair? The chair is magical all of a sudden! Some of you might even, well you probably wouldn’t because this is a ridiculous example, but maybe you come to class early, you sit in that chair, just to see what would happen and people are very curious and that’s exactly what we’re like and that’s a very old story too, it’s like opening Pandora’s Box, don’t open that box, you’ll be sorry! It’s like Oh, oh! All the horrors of the world fly out, believe me, you will open Pandora’s Box many times in your life because with your 0:46 family or maybe your mate, you’ll have this idea that they have a box, with things, that you’ll wanna know about, and say well I’m kinda curious about this particular event, so why don’t you tell me about it? And they say no, you probably shouldn’t open that box and you keep bugging them and then they open and all sorts of things fly out that you didn’t expect and maybe you think “hey maybe it would’ve been better if I just left that damn box closed!”, but you can do the same thing to yourself, believe me, so the Pandora’s Box idea, the forbidden fruit idea, that’s a major league idea , part of the reason in the Judeo-Christian tradition why people are saddled with the notion of original sin is because hyper cortically developed chimpanzees without much sense can’t keep their hands off things, and so they keep exploring even when they know better and every time they do that they learn something that 0:47 destroys the paradise that they currently inhabit. You never learn anything in your life that’s important without having a pretty damn destabilizing effect on you at the moment of realization. You learn something happy, it’s like, whatever! Now all that means is that I was doing things right, like it’s nice and everything but it’s not informative. You do something and all hell breaks loose, that’ll make you think, you may never stop thinking for the rest of your life! The unknown is that which surrounds the known, it’s an unexplored territory, I think it’s usually represented as female for a variety of reasons. And not as female exactly, it’s not the right way to think about it, as feminine, and that’s not the same thing, because feminine is a symbolic category 0:48 whereas female, an actual female, you don’t wanna confuse the metaphor, with the actuality. Because we have these social cognitive categories built in, masculine, feminine, and offspring, something like that, we had to use what we could to represent what we were attempting to figure out and we kinda mapped them onto the external realities of being , the best we could, using what we could, and so nature is benevolent and its fruitful, all things come from nature and all things come from the unknown because the known is already there, it’s the unknown that manifests the new, so that’s part of the reason for the characterization of the unknown as feminine, and it’s also the case that women take a massive role in sexual selection among human beings 0:49 so that from an evolutionary perspective, you’re twice as likely to be a failure as man , then you are as a woman, in that you have twice as many female ancestors as male ancestors. And you think , well that’s impossible! But it’s not. All you have to do is imagine that every woman has one child, half the men have two and other half zero, and so end of problem. And that’s basically how it works out, women are more choosy on matters than men from a substantial margin. There’s a funny study done, by the guy who established one of the big dating sites, and he looked at how women rated men, and they rated the 50th percentile men at the 15th percentile so 85% of men were below average, according to women’s ratings. Now men have their same arbitrary choice because they prefer younger women to 0:50 older women and they were more swayed by attractiveness, that didn’t have nearly as big an effect on their actual rating of women. From a Darwinian perspective, nature is that which selects, that’s all it is! Sexual selection plays a massive role in human evolution. The fact that we have these massive brains is very likely a consequence of feedback and sexual selection, because that’s the only time you can get really rapid changes in evolutionary space where you get a process going that reinforces itself there’s a little preference for intelligence and then that produces more intelligent men and women and then there’s a little more preference for intelligence, maybe then that turns in to the ability to speak or to master fire and then there’s way more selection for intelligence and the brain just goes like this 0:51 and women have paid a really big price for that because your hips are basically so wide you can barely run and if they were any wider you couldn’t, and the pelvic passageway through which the baby travels is too small, so it’s really painful and dangerous and the baby’s head has to compress quite a lot, they come out cone shaped often. They’re born really young, so you have to take care of them forever, so it’s like what the hell. A deer is born, a fawn born, two seconds later is standing and then it’s running from a lion! It’s like fifteen minutes later and a baby it’s like, it just lies there, utters plaintive noises, that’s all it can do, it does that like for ten months, before it could skitter away from a sloth if it was predatory, you really gotta take care 0:52 of those creatures, that’s a big price to pay for our cortical evolution. Here’s some of the symbolic representatives of the unknown. The unconscious Dionysian forest of the Id, so that’s Freud’s representation of the unknown, the terrors of the darkness , that’s the unknown, the monsters that lurk there. The source and the resting place of all things, the Great Mother, the Queen, the Matrix which means matter which means mother, the Matriarch, matter, mother, the container, the cornucopia, the object to be fertilized, the source of all things, the fecund, the pregnant, the strange, the emotional, the foreigner, the place of return and rest, the deep, the valley, the cleft, the cave, hell, death and the grave because it’s beyond, the moon ruler of the night and mysterious of the night and matter and the Earth. And you know 0:53 all this because when you watch a movie that is rife with symbolic representations, it draws on those underlying metaphors and their natural, where does a witch live, well in a swamp for God’s sake! She doesn’t live in the penthouse of a New York tower! She lives in a swamp and its dark there and if the moon’s up that’s even better, maybe it could be a crescent moon or a full moon, witches live in the right place, if you’re gonna understand it, and you all understand all of that, it’s part of the structure of your imagination you could say, it’s part of the unspoken fantastical imagination that unites all of us and makes us specifically human, there’s a good representation of the underworld and the place of transformation and that’s hell and Isis in Egypt was Queen of the underworld and the underworld generally has a Queen and she usually shows up when order falls apart so 0:54 you go to the underworld when your life falls apart, that’s what it means! So when you see these stories of the hero, you know, journeying to unknown lands of terror and danger that’s what happens to you, it happens to you all the time! You’re in this little safe space, the hobbit in the shire and there’s a great evil brewing somewhere and so off you go, off into the land of terror and uncertainty and better to go on purpose than to accidently that’s for sure, because at least you can be prepared, and we also know if you’re going to face a threat, if you face it voluntarily, what happens is your body activates itself for exploration and mastery but if you face it involuntarily, same size threat, then you revert to prey mode and you’re frozen, that’s way, way, way more stressful! It’s way harder on your body and so 0:55 it’s better to keep your eye open and watch for emergent threats, because you all know what you’re not doing quite right and where your life is likely to unravel, you all have a sense of that and the best to do is to not ignore that , to pay attention to it, to watch it and to take corrective action early and then you stay on top of things, your little trip to the underworld might be a few minutes long instead of a catastrophe that produces post-traumatic stress disorder and knocks you out for four or five years and maybe you never recover so and that’s what these kind of symbolic representations mean , these are states of being that indicate being devoured and you can be devoured by your own unconscious, Jesus that happens all the time! What does that mean? Well it’s an autonomous thing in some sense, if you get depressed or really anxious, you don’t have any control over that! 0:56 It sweeps up over you and pulls you down, why down? Well down is where you go when you’re sad, you don’t go up, man I’m up today, oh that’s too bad, no! It’s man I’m down today and that’s partly this and partly this is subordinate and its partly because down is closer to the ground and farther from the sky, there’s all sorts of reasons you’re feeling down rather than up, up is where you’re aiming, right? You aim up, you don’t aim down, the reason those phrases make sense is because they’re locked deeply into the structure of imagination, those are the archetypal structures according to Jung, I think that he’s, as far I can tell, he’s dead accurate! I think we understand the biology of such things much better than we did 0:57 so there’s more representations, she’s quite the friendly creature, that’s Kali, I like this representation better, those are heads by the way and hands, so she sort of represents, very complex things, she represents death and transformation, I really like this representation, I think it’s brilliant, so imagine what the people were doing who formulated these representations, what they were trying to do was make a representation of the domain threat itself! So that they could deal with the idea, because we can say threat, well what the hell does that mean? Well, threat is the category of all threatening things, and so you can think about threat, across all the individual instances, and maybe you can figure out how to deal with threat, what’s the best way to deal with threat so that you most effectively deal with threat, well that’s sort of like apart from how you deal with pain that’s sort of like the 0:58 ultimate question of human beings, do you wanna be terrified? No! So do you wanna be in danger, no, so you better figure out how to deal with threat, so first of all you have to conceptualize it, we’ll take a look at this representation , that’s Kali, her hair’s on fire, well fire, ya know, that’s a numinous phenomena, dangerous but transformative, she’s wearing a headdress of skulls, she has a weapon, and in this hand, and she has a tiger’s tongue, she often has a snake around her waist, none of these do, but she often does, in this case that’s because it’s a snake, we’ve already covered that! Well these things that look like snakes, aren’t, you notice how her belly is concave? It’s because she’s given birth to this unfortunate person that she happens to be standing up and she’s eating intestines first and that’s a fire ring which she is in 0:59 and got skulls on the inside of it, it’s like what’s that supposed to do, partly it’s supposed to represent that which terrifies you! It’s like yeah fair enough! Because I don’t imagine you saw those things in there before I explained them but someone who was familiar with that image would know what it meant, it’s like some poor artist was sitting there thinking “Well how do I represent destruction?” It’s like bang! Whoa, okay we’ll put that down and we won’t look at it again! So what do you with this? You make sacrifices to it and you think well that’s kinda primitive! First of all, that doesn’t really exist, well it does if it’s an amalgam of threat symbols, it exists, that’s for sure! So it exists as an abstraction if nothing else, do you offer it sacrifices? Well what the hell do you think you do? What are you doing in class, why aren’t you drinking vodka and snorting cocaine because you could be doing that! 1:00 Instead here you are listening to me, slaving away in university, you’re young, it’s like really? You’ve got nothing better to do? Than sit there! Well what you’re willing to forego today’s pleasure for tomorrow’s advantage, that’s what sacrifice is and human beings discovered that dramatically first, we were apes for God’s sake! We didn’t just leap up and say “Oh we better save for tomorrow!” It took thousands of years for that idea to emerge and it emerged in dramatic form. Society is sort of like a God, no they weren’t thinking this through! If you’re going to represent society it’s like this masculine God that’s always judging the hell out of you and that’s everywhere all at the same time, it’s like yeah yeah, that’s true absolutely. And what do you have to do with it, well you have to give it what it wants! Why do you have to give it what it wants? 1:01 Because it’ll crush you if you don’t. And that’s exactly right! And if you’re lucky and you give it the right sacrifice, it’ll smile on you, and you get to have a good life, and that was the major discovery of mankind, that was a killer discovery. It was like the discovery of the future! We discovered the future as a place! And it was a place that you could bargain with! You can bargain with the future! Yeah that’s just, Wow! What an idea that is! It’s so unlikely, well how do you bargain with the future? Well you give it what it wants. Some of that’s you maintain your social relationship and you make yourself useful to other people and you shape yourself so that you can cooperate with people, and you don’t act impulsively and maybe you squirrel away something for the next harvest when you’re hungry and then the future isn’t hell! 1:02 And you make the proper sacrifices and if you sacrifice to Kali then she turns into her opposite and showers benevolence on you, and that’s Mother Nature right? It’s like look out for Mother Nature, man, two weeks out in the bush right now and you’re dead. And it’s not pleasant. And if it’s the spring you last longer. But the bugs eat you and so that’s not very fun either! So nature is bent on your destruction. But if you treat it properly and carefully and make the right sacrifices then maybe one of her trees will offer you some fruit and that would be okay. And so believe me, lots of people died trying to figure that out. So here’s another way of looking at it, I said order and chaos, known unknown, explored unexplored territory, I love this , this is the Taoist symbol. 1:03 It’s the symbol of being and being isn’t reality as you would conceptualize it as a scientist, it’s more like reality as it manifests itself to you as a living thing, which is completely different. Science extracts all the subjectivity, all that is there is an array of objective facts of equivalent value and that’s part of its method, but that’s not the world in which you live, the world in which you live is full of motivation and terror and pain and joy and frustration and other people that’s for sure. That’s the real world, well that’s what this is, it’s the real world! And what is it made out of? It’s made out of all those things you know that can get out of hand because the explored and the known can get so damn tight, that its nothing but a tyrant and then it’s all those things that you don’t know and that adds a lot of spice to life, 1:04  you want a little adventure , you don’t want to go out with someone who’s so predictable that you know everything about them in a week, unless you’re hyper-conservative you wanna go out with someone who’s got…they’re a little erratic, not too erratic let’s say, they’re a little dangerous, perhaps not too dangerous, but some of that at least! You want predictability with a bit of unpredictability, that’s exactly what this means. That’s predictability with a little bit of unpredictability in it! And what that also means , what you know can be turned into what you don’t know, just like that, and that’s gonna happen to you lots of times in your life. When someone close to you dies suddenly, order turns into chaos and now you’re in chaos and what the hell are you gonna do there? And that’s a good question! Because you need to know what to do there! Because you’re going to be there and it happens to you when your dreams fall apart, your dreams for your life, and your discover something awful 1:05 about yourself that you didn’t know, it flips you on you all the time in small ways sometimes, you have a fight with a friend or in big ways that wipe you out indefinitely sometimes, because you can fall into chaos and never get out, that’s people who are trapped in the belly of the beast, it isn’t necessary that when you descend into chaos that you learn something and get back out, you could be stuck there, suffering, until you die! And I wouldn’t recommend that. It’s something to avoid, but it happens to people all the time, you see them wandering around , shattered on the streets of Toronto, they’re done, they’re in chaos and there’s so much chaos around them that you won’t even go near them. The chaos spreads 8 feet around them and when you see someone like that, it’s like, well first we’re gonna look too closely, and people like that often don’t like you to look at them because 1:06 that helps them remember where they are and that’s no pleasant thing. And you’re gonna just stay away from that! Maybe you’ll cross the street, maybe you’ll keep your head down, whatever, you’re not going anywhere near that chaos and no bloody wonder and you don’t think about that much after you pass it, because it’s a hell of a thing to think about and what are you gonna do about it anyways? You don’t know what to do about it. You might just make it worse. Well so chaos, that’s the other half of life, it can turn into order, sometimes better order, that’s actually what you do when you explore, when you find something new, not too new, not too Pandora Boxy, you bite off as much as you can chew but no more , so that rearranges the way you look at the world, but you’re doing it voluntarily, you so you can tolerate the re-calibration, you strengthen the order right? Because now you’ve become more competent 1:07 I would say that you’re trying to live on the edge between order and chaos and that’s an actual place, it’s a meta-place, but its more real than places, because it’s old, it really exists, and your nervous system knows that, it sees the world this way, in fact the right hemisphere is roughly specialized for chaos and the left hemisphere is roughly specialized for order which is why the left hemisphere tends to have the linguistic elements and why people are right handed and the right hemisphere has a more diffuse structure , it’s more associated with negative emotion and imagination and the two communicate between each other between the corpus callosum and in the right hemisphere appears the update the left hemisphere or kind of slowly, often in dreams, and if your right hemisphere is hurt for example, back here in the parietal lobe, you lose the left part of your body, you can’t move it anymore, but you also lose the idea that you have a left 1:08 part of your body. So it’s like a blindness to the left. If someone comes along, and says “you’re not moving you’re left arm”, you’re gonna say |yeah well my arthritis is bothering me, I haven’t moved it for six months.” You’re not moving your left foot it’s like well ya know, “I’m too tired”. Well what’s happened is the left hemisphere has a representation of the body and it’s not being updated because the part of the brain that would notice, that the left is gone because of a stroke, isn’t there anymore. And so the left already has a model, it’s not gonna change just, it’s hard to change your model of yourself, have a tooth pulled, what happens? Your damn tongue is in that hole for the next six months, fiddling around constantly and that’s because you’re rebuilding your neurological model of your body, it’s like try that with your whole left side and see how well you do! 1:09 So this guy named Ramachandran (Vilayanur Subramanian « Rama » Ramachandran ) was experimenting with people like this and one of things he did was checking their balance and you can do that by irrigating the ear with cold water and that makes people move their eyes back and forth because it upsets the stimular system, what he found was if he poured cold water in the left ear of someone with right parietal damage who had left neglect, they would all of a sudden wake up, catastrophically they’d have a terrible reaction to the fact that they were paralyzed on the left and they would know that it happened and cry and met all sorts of distress and no wonder and twenty minutes later they would snap back into their damaged mode of being and not deny , they couldn’t update the model, they didn’t have the neurology for it anymore so they were back to not noticing it was gone 1:10 coming up with stories about it, so that’s a good example of how the right and left hemisphere’s work together and how they’re kinda mapped onto this weirdly enough so we’re adapted to the meta-reality, and what that would be, we’re adapted to that which remains constant across the longest spans of time! And that’s not the same things that you see flitting around you day to day, they’re just like clouds, they’re evaporating , there’s things that are underneath that are more fundamental realities like the dominance hierarchy, like the tribe, like the danger outside of society, like the threat that other people pose to you and that you pose to yourself, those are eternal realities and we’re adapted to those, that’s our world and that’s why we express that in stories. And so then you might say “well, how do you adapt yourself to this world?” and the answer to that is 1:11 and I believe this is a neurological answer, I believe this, that your brain can tell you when you’re optimally situated between chaos and order and the way it tells you that by producing the sense between engagement and meaning so let’s say there’s a place in the environment that you should be, well you don’t wanna be terrified out of your skull, like what good is that, and you don’t wanna be so comfortable that you might as well sleep! You wanna be somewhere you’re kinda on firm ground here but over here you’re kinda testing out new territory and some of you who are exploratory and emotionally stable, you’re gonna go pretty far out into the unexplored territory without destabilizing yourself and other people are gonna just put a toe in the chaos and that’s neuroticism, basically, that’s your sensitivity to threat 1:12 that’s calibrated differently, in different people and some people are more exploratory than others, that’s kinda extraversion and openness working together and intelligence, some people are going to tolerate, a large mixture of chaos in their order, those are liberals by the way and I mean that technically, liberals are more interested in novel chaos and conservatives are more interested in the stabilization of the structures that already exist. Who’s right? Well it depends on the situation and that’s why conservatives and liberals have to talk to each other because one of them isn’t right and the other wrong, sometimes the conservatives are right and sometimes the liberals are right because the environment’s going like this, you can’t predict the damn thing! So that’s why you have to communicate and that’s what a democracy does, it allows people of different temperamental types to communicate and calibrate the damn societies so anyway. 1:13 So let’s say you’re optimally between chaos and order, so what does that mean? Well you’re stable enough! But you’re interested, right? Because a little novelty heightens your anxiety, it wakes you up a little bit, that’s the adventure part of it, but it also focuses the part of your brain that does exploratory activity and that’s associated with please, that’s the Dopamine circuit and so if you’re optimally balanced, you know you’re there when you’re listening to an interesting conversation or you’re engaged in one. You’re saying some things you know and the other person is saying some things they know, but all of what you know is changing! Wow that’s so interesting, you’ll have a conversation like that forever, or you’re reading a book like that, or listening to a piece of music that models that, because what music does is provide you with multi-level predictable forms that transform just the right amount 1:14 and so music is a very representational art form. It says: this what the universe is like, there’s a dancing element to it, repetitive, cute little variations that sort of surprise and delight you and you think wow that’s so cool! It doesn’t matter how nihilistic you are, music still infuses you with a sense of meaning! That’s because it models meaning, that’s what it does, that’s why we love it! And you can dance to it, and that sort of symbolizes you putting yourself in harmony with these multiple layers of reality and positioning yourself properly and you like that too! You’ll pay for it, “oh boy I get to go dancing, oh boy I get to listen to music!” It’s like what the hell are you doing? Listening to music? What good is that? Well you think that’s a stupid question, I don’t care about your dopey criticism, I’m going to listen to some music! Right? There’s no rational argument against music! 1:15 You just don’t even think about rebutting, you just walk away from someone who’s stupid enough to ask that question! Some things are obvious. Well, why? So that’s pretty fun. What mediates between these two domains, that’s what consciousness does, and that’s sort of the individual and that’s the hero and that’s another way of thinking about it, it’s the Logos, it’s the word that generates order out of chaos in the beginning of time, it’s the consciousness that’s interacting with the matter of the world that produces being, that’s basically you, for all intents and purposes, how do you do that ? The unconscious does that to some degree, because it’s with our fantasy that we first meet the unknown. 1:16 Well look, say you’re going out with a new person, what do you do? You project a fantasy on them and then you fall in love with the fantasy, and aren’t you stupid because you’re gonna find out that the match between your damn fantasy and the actual person is tenuous at best! And so Jung would call that a projection of either the anima or the animus. The animus when a man projects onto a woman he finds desirable, it’s like “Oh she’s the perfect woman!” Well how do you know that? You’ve seen her like 4 seconds! But it grips you, and the same thing happens in the opposite direction and it’s an action of instinct, you fall in love with the image, but interestingly enough, what you do in a relationship that works is that you actually, I think that what you see, it’s a rough approximation, when you project the ideal and fall in love with it, you see what could be, it could be that, but its gonna take a hell of a lot of work 1:17 because you got no shortage of flaws, and the other person has no shortage of flaws, so you’re bringing your flaws together and that’s gonna produce a lot of friction and you’re gonna have to engage in a lot of dialogue, before you approach that level of perfection again, maybe you can do it, then you get to live happily ever after, well wouldn’t that be nice? Well the unconscious meets the unknown and it meets it with imagination and fantasy and dream and art! You don’t just go from what you don’t know to fully articulated knowledge in one bloody leap, you can’t do that! You have to extend pseudo pods of fantasy and imagination into the unknown, that’s kinda what like theorizing is like right? Even scientifically, you don’t know something scientifically, you generate a theory, well it’s an imaginative representation that your unconscious is helping you generate and so you meet the unknown with fantasy. 1:18 That’s what the unconscious is for from the psychoanalytic perspective. That’s what dreams do! And you can see why, you dream about the future. It’s like what the future gonna be like, you have a little imaginative story going on , you don’t really create it, you sort of watch it unfold, maybe you can tweak it here and there, it sort of comes to you , wherever the hell things like that come from! The unconscious, that’s the psychoanalytic answer, it’s not really much of an answer because it’s more like a representation of a place that we don’t understand. That’s where creativity comes from and I mean some people are really creative right down to the bloody core! In my clinical practice, I often see people who are high in openness because they’re attracted to me, because they watch my lecture and you have to be kinda high in openness to like my lectures, so because, they go everywhere and they’re not necessarily very orderly. 1:19 Lots of my clients are really high in openness, they’re funny people often, especially if they’re smart, because they have the most nihilistic intelligence, you could imagine and it’s just self-critical and nihilistic and brutally brutal, man! And smart! They just criticize themselves out of existence, so often I just have to try to get them to quit listening to their chattering, self-critical rationality and go out and create something with their massive creativity, as long as they’re doing that they’re engaged in the world and happy as hell, but as soon as that self-critical rationality comes in and it shuts down the creativity, they’re just like walking corpses you know. And it’s because if you’re really open, you’re a tree, and it has some trunks, and your most prominent trait is the lively trunk, and if you’re a creative person and you’re not engaging in a creative enterprise, you’re like a: tree that has had its vitality amputated! 1:20 This is not trivial, this stuff is deeply rooted in your biology and those are people who often have dream lives you can’t believe. I had one client, he has four spectacular dreams a week, most of the time we just spend discussing them. And we have another client who could be lucid in her dreams which is more common among women, she could ask the damn characters what they represented and they would tell her, it’s like okay that was pretty weird, like a lot of things that told were really helpful and they were not things that she wanted to hear, she basically, one of them told her, if she was gonna live, she’d have to go visit a slaughterhouse and the reason for that was because she was raised as a little princess and protected from horrible Mother Nature until she hit puberty and which time she turn into an evil villain 1:21 because that’s how the family worked, perfect child, evil teenager overnight. And then, well that was hard on her and she wasn’t prepared because she thought the world was princess world, she couldn’t go through a butcher store without having a fit and no wonder, like really? Jesus! No wonder! But, you do it. But she couldn’t so we used to go to butcher stores, that would make her cry and then she was a vegetarian, that would make her cry and bemoan the cruelty of the world it’s like fair enough, man. Those are bloody slabs of meats, I don’t know everyone isn’t screaming when they’re walking through the butcher store, but you gotta get used to because you can’t live in the world otherwise and so the dream character who was a gypsy told her that she had to visit a slaughterhouse, seemed rather impractical, I asked her if she could think of anything else to do, why don’t we visit a funeral home and watch and watch an embalming and I thought “Oh, good! 1:22 That sounds like a fun way to spend a day!” So I phoned up a funeral parlor and I said I had a client who was terrified of death and I was a therapist who was also shaky, a little bit, on the concept, myself! They had no problem with that, they deal with death all the time, which is really something to think about, right? A human being can actually have an occupation where they do nothing but deal with death and they don’t go stark raving mad! It’s like what the hell’s up with that? It’s like working in a palliative care ward where your clients that you have relationship with, all they’re gonna do is die! This week, next week, the week after, people do that! It’s like those people are tough man! They’re tough. So went to the embalming which was , I have a rather, high level of disgust sensitivity, it was a little on the rough side for me 1:23 she sat there and waited outside in this little room, and she was not looking at that, and she would kinda go like this, and that was pretty good, and then she’d go like this, and then she’d go like this and then she watched it. Then she asked if she could go in, she put on the glove and she touched the body, she didn’t have a fit or a panic attack and so she walked away from there, learning that there’s a hell of a lot more to her than she thought there was and that she could see things that she didn’t think she could see and live and after that she sort of had a touchstone, well I’m kinda afraid of this, well is it bad as going to see the embalming? Well it’s not that bad, well I guess I can do it, it’s like an initiation right? She had an initiation, and so did I! I learned a lot from learning doing that, I learned one of the things that you need to do, if you’re going to be human being is prepare yourself to be useful in the face of death! And so when you have a parent that dies which shatters people’s ideas, 1:24 often they can’t even think about it. If you can’t even think about that, man you got some thinking to do! Because you need to at least be able to think about that because otherwise you’re gonna be a wasteland when that happens, and you never know, you could even have a higher ambition, maybe you could even be useful when that happens! Instead of being part of the heap of destroyed people who also have to be taken care of and that’s brutal! You have to be brutal to be useful in the aftermath of your parent’s death, you don’t get to crumble and fall apart, and you know you have every reason to, so you gotta be some tough monster to manage that. So you wanna be useful in the face of tragedy? Or pathetic? Well, you make your choice. So out of unconscious, you get ritual, you get dreams, you get drama, you get stories, you get art, you get music 1:25 and that sort of buffers us, we have our little domain of competence and we’re buffered by the domain of fantasy and culture and that’s really what you do, you learn about when you come to university if you’re lucky and the professors are smart enough to teach you something about culture instead of constantly telling you that it’s completely reprehensible and be destroyed, why you would prefer chaos to order is beyond me, and the only possible reason is that you haven’t read enough history to understand what chaos means and believe me, if you understood what it means, you’d be pretty God Damn careful about tearing down the temple that you live in, unless you want to be a denizen of chaos and believe me, some people do! Because that’s when the impulses that you harbor can really come out and shine and so a little gratitude is in order and that makes you appreciative of the Wise King while being smart enough to know he’s also an evil tyrant 1:26 it’s like, that’s a total conception of the world, it’s balanced, yeah we should preserve nature but good God, it is trying to kill us! Yes our culture is tyrannical and oppresses people, but it is protecting us from dying! That’s helpful! And yes we’re reasonably good people, but don’t take that theory to far until you’ve tested yourself and that’s what wisdom is at least in part and that what these stories try to teach you. There’s a nice mythological representation , it’s like the dome of the known and the seeker looking outside, that’s a metaphysical representation, and that is the world as it looks to us, you go out in a field and it looks like there’s a dome covering it, it’s a circle, big circle with a dome over it, what’s outside the dome? Well the unknown, that’s where heaven is, theoretically, it’s a projection obviously, 1:27 heaven is in the unknown , well it was localized in space, I guess that’s partly because when people looked up in the sky they were overwhelmed with awe, so it’s a reasonable conclusion, it’s a projection of an unconscious presupposition, it’s a projection of fantasy, heaven is a fantasy, and I’m not denigrating fantasy by the way, it’s projected imaginatively onto the sky and that’s part of the way you discover what in your fantasy, well this is us man, we mediate between chaos and order and those are the two archetypal representations, fundamentally, and I think they apply to both genders, women can act as the individual who holds the world on his/her shoulders, men can play a maternal role, female human beings are quite 1:28 masculine and male human beings are quite feminine, maybe this archetype dominates among men and that archetype dominates among women which I would say, that is the case, as far as I’m concerned, although there are individual conceptions, of course those two things have to work in conjunction, but that’s you! The eternal mediator between chaos and order! Which also has its enemy, that’s Horus and that’s Seth, who eventually turns into Satan, as the West progresses so to speak, and that’s represented there as well, the temptations of I would say, resentment and hatred, which everyone has to fight with all the time. Alright, initiations! So this is cool, this a standard hero story, initiatory rites are part of human heritage, let’s take a look, this is from Eliade. 1:29 “I would like even now to stress the fact that the psychopathology of the Shamanic vocation is not profane, it does not belong to ordinary symptomatology, it’s not ordinary mental illness, it has an initiatory structure and signification , in short, it reproduces a traditional, mystical pattern. The total crisis of the future shaman, sometimes leading to complete disintegration of the personality into madness can be evaluated not only as an initiatory death but also as a symbolic return to the pre-cosmogonic chaos to the amorphous and indescribable state that perceives any cosmogony.” Well what he means by that is that, the mythological view of the emergence of order, that’s cosmogony, is that there’s a state of potential and chaos out of which order emerges, here’s how it is that you think that way, because you do think that way, imagine what you’re facing when you’re facing the future, well you might say 1:30 the future is full of potential, what the hell does that mean? You act as if that potential is really a real thing! And you’re confronting it all the time I’m confronting the potential of the future, well it doesn’t exist yet, so what you’re confronting doesn’t even really exist, what you’re conceptualizing doesn’t really exist and in some sense you bring it into being by plotting your path through it, well the pre-cosmogonic chaos is the same as the potential of the future, it’s exactly the same idea, it’s the realm of possibility from which actuality emerges. And you participate in turning that possibility into actuality, that’s what you’re doing all the time, can I explain that? Well no, I have no idea how consciousness and the substrate of the world interact, I can only said that’s how it looks! That’s how it feels. 1:31 That’s how people act, they’ll get into trouble if they don’t manifest their potential , whatever that is. That’s all those things you could but you’re not, well where are those, it’s just potential, well that’s the chaos. That’s the, I would say, that’s the cosmos that you live in all the time, a little story, the thing that you extract out of chaos and your conceptualization of where you wanna be at some point, could be ten minutes, could be three years and you can slide it and then you have a little plan about how you should move your body to transform one in to the other, that’s your action pattern, that’s your little story, and when you ask someone to say what they were up to, they’ll tell you a little story like that. I was at some place and I went somewhere else and here’s how I did it. Or they might tell you a more interesting story which was I was at some place 1:32 and something happened, that I really didn’t expect, it knocked me for a loop, that’s a good divorce story. It’s like “I came home one night and my wife was gone” it’s like yeah, chaos! And probably a bit of willful blindness preceding it, we might suspect. Well maybe you learned something down there, maybe you don’t, but hopefully you do, and you put yourself together if you’re lucky. And then “pop, bang!” you pop up into another little structure of order and that’s an initiatory process, you’re somewhere stable, it falls apart and maybe you break it apart on purpose, you do it voluntarily, people do that all the time. They do that when they experiment with drugs, and when they go on wild adventures, and when they break themselves out of their normal routine and throw themselves somewhere they don’t understand and hope that that’s going to produce a transformation of personality 1:33 that’s the basic story, that’s the initiatory story. This is William James, which was one of the modern establishers of Modern Psychology and kind of an odd guy, he was an early experimenter with psychedelics, of course they’ll never tell you that, but he was, and his drug of choice was nitrous oxide which is an inhalant gas, which seems to be inert , no one really knows why it works, but it produces quite intense hallucinogenic experiences, mystical experience, although if you breathe too much of it you die, because it doesn’t have any oxygen in it, so don’t do that. And he wrote some really bad hippy poetry back in the 1880’s while he was experimenting with nitrous oxide. I’ll read a little bit of that to you: “Pure Experience is the name, which I give to the original flux of life before reflection has categorized it, only new born babes and persons in semi-coma 1:34 from sleep drugs, illnesses, or blows can have an experience, pure in the literal sense, of a that, which is not yet any definite what, though ready to be any sorts of what’s, full both of oneness and manyness, but in respects that don’t appear changing throughout, yet so confusedly, that its phases interpenetrate, at no points either of distinction or either of identity can be caught” – 1905, William James, Journal of Philosophy. You know a lot of these old guys that established what we regard as fairly stable bodies of knowledge were just as crazy as you can possibly imagine, they’re just the most peculiar damn people and they get sanitized as they are represented in history and that’s no fun! It’s much more interesting to know what they were like, they were just so bloody peculiar and strange and involved in all sorts of weird things that’s a lot more fun to know that. 1:35 Here’s his poem , wow, it’s like right from 1968! “No verbiage can give it, because the verbiage is other, incoherent, coherent, same, and it fades and it’s infinite and it’s infinite, don’t you see the difference, don’t you see the identity, constantly opposites united, the same me telling you to write and no to write, extreme, extreme, extreme, something and other than that thing, intoxication and otherness than intoxication, every attempt at betterment, every attempt at otherment, it fades, forever and forever as we move.” It’s just about as incoherent as post-modernist philosophy! So we know for archaic and traditional cultures that a symbolic return to chaos, is equivalent to preparing a new creation. It follows we may interpret the psychic chaos of the future shaman as a sign that the profane man is being dissolved and a new personality being prepared for birth. 1:36 Transformation, here’s a way of thinking about it, paradise lost, redemption, classic story of mankind, always. There’s a great past, we’re in a state of chaos, we’re heading towards a better future, everyone thinks that way, stories are based on that, well that’s that! Now, Ellenberge who wrote a lot about the psychoanalysts believed that Freud and Jung in particular had a creative illness which he regarded as sort of Shamanic transformation and he said that a creative illness has these elements, it succeeds a period of intense pre-occupation with an idea and search for certain truth, it’s a polymorphous condition that can take the shape of depression, neurosis, psychosomatic ailments, or even psychosis. Jung was in that state, when he wrote the Red Book which was just released last year, which is full of visionary illustrations and very strange poetry and 1:37 it contains the communications he had with imaginative beings that he conjured up when practicing when doing exactly that, he practiced that for years and he had these autonomous beings manifest themselves in his fantasy and had long conversations with them. And you know he was working as a doctor and having a sane normal life, well it’s kinda, it’s really something, whatever the symptoms there felt as painful well he thought maybe he was going mad, and some people think he did, if not agonizing by the subject with alternating periods of alleviation and worsening throughout the illness the subject never loses the thread of his dominating pre-occupation. It’s often compatible for normal, professional activity and family life, but even if he keeps to his social activities, he’s almost entirely absorbed with himself. He suffers from feelings of utter isolation even when he has a mentor who guides him through the ordeal 1:38 like the Shaman apprentice with his master, the termination is often rapid and marked by a phase of exhilaration , the subject emerges from his ordeal with a permanent transformation in his personality and a conviction that he’s discovered a new truth or a new spiritual world. Many of the 19th and 20th century figures regarded universally as great, Nietszche, Darwin, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Freud, Jung, were all additionally characterized by lengthy periods of profound psychological unrest and uncertainty. Well you don’t generate a new theory without some birth pangs, right! Because your old theory has to bite the dust and when that happens, it’s like where are you? You don’t know. You know if you’re gonna come up with a new one? No! Here’s a cool thing, this is my daughter, she was five years at this point, she was playing princess with Julian her three year old, she said Dad if we killed a Dragon we could use his skin as armor, wouldn’t that be a good idea? 1:39 I thought “Hey, Yeah! That’s a hell of an idea kid!” You go right after the thing that frightens you the most and you develop something that protects you from doing that, where did she get that idea? Good work kiddo! She had plenty of dragons in her life. The following dream was described by my daughter Michaela, 3 years, 9 months old, about my son Julian one year. Julian was in the process of toilet training and rapid speech development and was having some trouble controlling his emotions. Michaela liked to call him “Baby”. We had several discussions that he wasn’t really a baby anymore. She told me this story while I was at the computer so I was able to get it verbatim. She wasn’t very happy about the idea that he wasn’t a baby anymore. Because she kinda liked the baby, she took care of that baby a lot and her little brain was having a hard time with whatever that thing is now, it isn’t a baby, it’s like well where’s my baby and believe me many mothers go through the same thing and then they attempt to keep their 1:40 children babies for the rest of their lives! So this is what Michaela said, the dream: Julian’s eyes fell out and then he falled into pieces. I said what sort of pieces, she said Julian pieces! And the bones falled out, then a hole got him and then there was water in it and when he came out he was big, mum? Julian isn’t a baby anymore? No! He’s a big boy and a bug with the legs got him out, cuz bugs can swim, and the hole was in the park and it moved into the backyard and he falled into it, a tree burned and left the hole. I thought “Wow! That’s so amazing!” It was like a shamanic transformation dream , it was like the tree, that’s the tree of life, it burnt a hole, the kid fell into it and dissolved him right down to his bones, this little bug which would be a Jungian representation of the self like Jiminy Cricket in Pinocchio, the bug was the thing that was alive that helped him through the transformation, he stepped out and now he was big, that was her little brain 1:41 conjuring up the notion of radical transformation, so this is cool, I hope this works. This is a dream my nephew had that someone animated. (video starts)“Jordan Peterson is a clinical psychologist from the University of Toronto. Now, I do disagree with some his fundamental ideas but I do like his thoughts in facing problems married with Stoic values. In one of his Maps of Meaning lectures, he deals with the true story of a four year old boy and nephew. Who was once, suffering from terrible night terrors, terrors that were waking him up screaming, this boy by the way did have some areas of instability in his family life. Jordan visited the young boy’s house and the boy was running around as knight with a sword and a shield and a helmet, at night time he’d take his sword and shield to bed. So Jordan got speaking to him and the boy described his dream. In the dream his was standing surrounded knee-high by dwarfs, these dwarfs had beaks and every time he would try to move, the dwarfs would jump up and bite him, a very frightening scenario for a young boy. Now if you look behind all the dwarfs, way in the background was a dragon, and every time this dragon would puff up fire and smoke, more dwarfs would be created, so there’s no point in fighting off the dwarfs because more would just be made. 1:42 (video continues) So Jordan tapped him and asked “What could you do about that?” So the kid says, “You jump on the dragon’s head, he can poke out his eyes with the sword and so couldn’t see. Then I could go down the throat to the box where the fire came from and carve a piece out of that box, thereby destroying it and using that piece as a shield” The child , before Jordan arrived, was already acting out enough what he knew what he had to do and after that conversation, he had no more night terrors, this is what Marcus Aurelius meant when he said “The impediment to action, advances action, what stands in the way becomes the way” 1:43 He was telling us that we must not shy away from problems or shun our personal responsibility. We must be willing to sacrifice our comfort. Go to the source for our problems to solve them and then take something away.” (video ends) Well there you go. So, yeah he was waking up screaming at night for weeks, that’s night terrors, he couldn’t really remember what the hell was going on and there was instability in his family, his parents got divorced soon after. He was off to Kindergarten and that was destabilizing him too, so it was fun to watch him zip around as a knight! It’s like where’d he get that idea, well he watched TV and movies, his little imagination was aggregating the picture of the hero, and then he was trying to act it out, that’s what he was doing, pretending , I’m pretending to be the thing that takes on the unknown and then he has this amazing dream, it’s like it’s mind-boggling! It’s so sophisticated! It’s like, “well here I am, there’s troubles, everywhere 1:44 and they’re biting me, they’re jumping’ up on me, and it’s like a hydra, you cut off a hydra’s head and seven more heads grow? It’s like, that’s life man! Solve one problem, seven more appear, right? That was the dragon at the background, chaos itself, chaos kept breeding these evil little dwarfs, which is what it does, one damn trouble after the other, fight this one off, it’s like who cares, the dragon , the dwarf generating machine is working in the background so, I asked him and that was purposeful “What could you do?” See that’s a leading question, that implies that there’s something that he could do. He said well I take my dad, that was missing in the animation, and we go, we’ll poke the dragon’s eyes out, go right to the source of the problem, extinguish it, make a shield, so that meant he would have strengthened his character by the encounter. 1:45 Brilliant! And I talked to his mom for months afterwards, done, no more night terrors. What had happened? He identified with the mythological hero, he identified with St. George and the dragon, he identified with the little bloody tree dwelling primate who twenty million years ago, decided to drop a stick on a snake! He adopted the classic human mode of being in the face of uncertainty! And construed himself that which could prevail. End of terrors. Well, guess we’re done eh?  o we’re gonna do something a little different than the syllabus today because we got this one hour, two hour problem, I really can’t cover constructivism, reasonably in two hours or one hour, that was supposed to be today, so what I’m gonna do instead 1:46 is continue on the line that I’ve been pursuing but I’m going to expand it up more into Jungian psychology, which is what we’re going after constructivism anyways so , I can weave the constructivism and the depth psychology together and it’s nice to do that because it gives you a coherent view. Just so you know, we’re one lecture ahead at the moment, roughly speaking, I’ll do constructivism, on Tuesday for two hours. So I showed you that animation I told you about my nephew’s dream, which is a remarkable dream, it’s just amazing, amazing dream, it’s got this archetypal pattern, and the pattern is, that there’s a threat and worse than that there are threats, and at the back of it, there is the fact of threat itself, so human beings, we’re so smart, eh? This so amazing that we figured this out! So you imagine human beings are the only creatures 1:47 that can really conceive of the class of all threatening things, that’s kinda why we can be permanently anxious, it’s sort of annoying, here you are and it’s safe, there’s no lions here or anything that might prey on you, but you can think of something to be anxious about no problem! I’m certain you’ve got some little skeleton rattling around in your closet, that’s eating away at you and so I think part of the reason we’re so damn awake, human beings, is because we’re always anxious, and you have to be awake when you’re anxious, and the anxiety system actually activates your reticular activating system, that actually produces, is the substrate for consciousness, if you snap a few fibers in the back of your brain, that are part of the reticulating activating system in a car accident, there’s something you’ll go into a coma and that’ll be that, you’re not getting out of it. Doesn’t take much 1:48 of an injury either in the right place. So anyways, so human beings have been struggling with this problem of threat forever, really! For as long as there’s been life, or as long as there’s been life with nervous system, ya know that’s several hundred million years, it’s a long time and of course , it’s easy to respond to a particular threat, think about zebras, there out there on the veldt, and there’s lions everywhere right? But the zebras, they’re calm. Because the lions are sleeping, so the zebras don’t think, apparently, oh my god! What’s going to happen when those lions wake up? Because they don’t think that way and they’re not gonna be happy if the lion goes into a hunting crouch and starts its hunting approach, obviously, but it’s not like the zebras are freaking out non-stop because there’s lions around. They can react to specific threats, but human beings, partly because we’ve discovered the future, which was a big mistake, because 1:49 the future’s an uncertain place. We realized that there isn’t any threat right now, but there might well be some tomorrow, and if there isn’t some tomorrow maybe next week or next month or next year, like its coming. And so there’s danger, so it’s the category of danger ya know and out of the category of danger, emerge specific threats, the dragon seems to be symbol of, it is a symbol , I believe, the ever-present fact of predatory threat but our nervous systems as they’ve become capable of abstraction have used that underlying architecture to represent more abstract categories, so it’s not a predator, because there are no dragons, but maybe a dragon is a snake and crocodile, and maybe a leopard, and maybe a predatory bird, all mangled into one monster , because a monster is actually technically that is made of disparate parts 1:50 so it’s a good symbolic representation for the unknown as such, that which lies beyond the campfire let’s say and what lurks out there. And so the eternal problem is what the hell do you do with the dragon? And that also explains why the dragon is typically a treasure guarder because it’s even more, the problem is even worse. Out there in no man’s land, out there in potential, there’s threat and mortal threat but there’s also endless opportunity and riches and wealth and the possibility of attracting someone, well, the dragon, you can’t just be afraid of it, you can’t just stay in your burrow the whole time, lots of animals more or less do that. Especially the nocturnal ones, they just hide away, but that isn’t what human beings are like, we’re not only prey animals, right? We’re also predators, and of course we’re crazy, absolutely insane chimpanzees, so we’re always out there mucking about with things, with our fingers and 1:51 our thumbs and taking the world apart and putting it back together, we’re crazily exploratory and trouble making and so we don’t just run from dragons we go hunt them down and so there’s a story here, the oldest story that mankind knows, literally it is the oldest story that we know, is in this story, the story basically is there’s a bounded space a walled garden, a walled city, and all the original cities were walled because if they weren’t , barbarians would swoop in and they’d just steal all your stuff, so that was kinda pointless, you wanted to have major league walls surrounding your territory, so that’s inhabited space, inside that is your little dominance hierarchy, so all you primates knew inside who was who inside that space so you didn’t have to fight with each other and you could predict each other’s behavior because you believed the same things and saw the world roughly as the same way and acted the same way, and so you were sort of secure 1:52 but then the problem is that that can always be breached, there’s always something outside of it that’s a danger, so that’s signified by this, little creature here! This dragon! That twirl in its tail is very common, it’s actually a symbol , imagistic languages , imagistic symbols have an ancient language, its referring to something that’s basically eternal, so it lives down here in this cave, it’s an underground thing and you can kinda imagine what that’s like , and sometimes this happens in initiation rituals among archaic people , when there gonna initiate usually the young men because nature initiates women all by itself, usually the young men maybe they’ll put them in a cave and leave them there well who knows for how long, ya gotta think, what’s in a cave? Caves are dark, I don’t know if you’ve ever been in one they’re really dark and so not only is there whatever 1:53 there is in a cave, you don’t know what the hell’s in the cave, there’s whatever you imagine might be in the cave and so when you’re in that cave and you’re alone, you’re confronting the devils, demons, and monsters of your imagination and so then you have a chance to deal with that and overcome it and perhaps that’s part of the initiation ceremony and that’s part of growing up because you have to learn how to face the things that terrify you and upset you and recast them and put them back together, we talked a little but about this idea, with the pre-cosmogonic chaos, that Eliade refers to and that’s the stuff out of which order is produced at the beginning of time, and it’s out of the stuff you constantly reproduce order and the Jungians, the psychoanalysts, especially the really deep psychoanalysts like Jung. Freud was a more surface psychoanalyst and that’s not an insult, there are some things Freud figured out that are absolutely amazing, he was a precursor to Jung for sure. 1:54 For Jung the hero’s journey was the journey inside the unconscious, and that would be, perhaps in some sense, the willingness to face everything terrible that’s happened to you and to think it through and articulate it and to come to grips perhaps with your own capacity for malevolence, that was a really important part of Jungian ideas, that the first step towards individuation, which is the manifestation of your full self, let’s say, was the discovery of your shadow. Your shadow is the part of you that will do terrible things under the right circumstances and even without that much provocation and it’s a terrifying part of you to come in contact with, it’s sort of the way that you’re specifically attached to the archetype of evil, you know modern people don’t really think much about the idea of good and evil, that’s because most of them are so damn naive, you can just barely even comprehend it, if you read any history, if you really 1:55 read it, like, and you don’t come away with the idea that evil exists you’re just reading the wrong kind of history! It’s just unbelievable what people can do to each other, we’re so imaginative. One of the things that I figured out about people, the reason that we’re, we have the knowledge of good and evil, let’s say, because we’re self-conscious, we know about ourselves, we know about our own vulnerabilities, you know what hurts you, way more than an animal knows, and so you’re also creative, so once you know what hurts you , man you can really hurt someone else, and you can do it in such a creative way, you can draw it out, you can make it excruciating, you can take people apart physically and psychologically, and you can keep them right on the edge of death, so you can keep doing that endlessly and that happens! A hell of lot more than you think! It happens a lot. Well and you think 1:56 that doesn’t involve me. Oh yes it does, man! That’s the problem, because you’re human and that’s the sort of things humans are capable of. I’m not saying that it’s all probable that you do that ever, but I’m saying you gotta take that into account when you’re looking at the world and thinking of all the perpetrators out there. It’s not like there’s perpetrators and there’s victims, it’s not how it works, it doesn’t work that way at all. The horrors of humanity as well as the noble elements of humanity are all elements of your central being. And for Jung, and this is the terrible thing, the pathway to higher wisdom was through the portal of, well you could say hell for that matter. Really! And so who wants to do that? It’s like. No! Maybe you’re resentful about something, you probably are, everybody is resentful about something and resentful is just a vicious emotion, it’s really useful, 1:57  because if you’re resentful about something, it either means you should grow the hell up and accept the responsibility and quit sniveling around or whining or it means that someone actually is oppressing you and pushing on you too hard and bullying and demeaning you and you have something to say or do that you’re not saying or doing. And no wonder you’re not saying it or doing it because ya know, it can be really dangerous to say things or do them to free yourself ,to free yourself from being oppressed , you can get in a lot of trouble in the short term for doing it, so it’s easier to not just say anything, sort of day after day, in the short term you protect yourself, but it just crushes you and then the resentment comes up, and that can just get so out of hand, it starts with resentment, then it goes for the desire for revenge, because you’ll play nasty little tricks on the person who’s oppressing you, at any chance you’ll talk about them behind their back, if they want you to do something, you’ll do it badly 1:58 or grudgingly, or you’ll do a half rate job, and you’ll set up little traps. So it puts you in a poisonous space , if you really start to dwell on that say, in your basement for 3 of 4 years, on just exactly how terrible the world is focused on you and how everyone’s rejected you, and you get to this point where you’re thinking that existence itself is a poisonous endeavor, and the best thing for you to do is go out there and create as much mayhem as you possible can and if you really get to a dark place, you think “I’m gonna create as much mayhem as I possibly can by targeting the most innocent thing I can possibly imagine” and then you end up shooting kids in Connecticut, and that’s how you get there. And so, that’s a bad road man. There’s dark things down there, but you can go there and people do, and they go through the hole of resentment. And so, resentment can tell you, you’ve got something to say, you better bloody well say it, you gotta 1:59 free yourself from what’s oppressing you, you have to stand up for that. You have become oppressed and then once you’re oppressed that’s just not so good and so in your marriage or in your relationships, you gotta tell people what you’re thinking, you don’t have to assume you’re right, that’s a whole different stor , because you’re not, you’re ignorant and biased, so you’re not right but you can stumble towards the expression of yourself and listen to the other person and hope that they tell you some way that you’re stupid. That’s useful, so you can be a little less stupid in the future, because wouldn’t that be good, so you go after the unknown, you don’t protect what you know, you already know what you know, that’s why you have to talk to people you don’t agree with, that’s why you have to talk to your enemies because they’re gonna tell you things you don’t know! You can even listen to them, 2:00 it’s possible that they know a thing or two you don’t know. But people don’t like that. They just talk to people who think the same, and they just stay stupid. And that’s not good! Because if you’re not wise, the world will wallop you, it will flatten you! And far more than it has to, and then you’ll be bitter and resentful and you’ll be part of that force that wallops instead of the force the fights against that, so you go after the dragon and that’s what this guy is doing. He’s going after the dragon, it’s threatening the society, cuz it always does, chaos, what’s outside of order, always threatens order, always, always! So you have to step forward in this manner voluntarily and go after that when it’s still manageable and that’s the case in your own life, if you’ve had a proclivity to be bullied in the past and you want to get out of that , what you have to do is make yourself awake to the 2:01 initial stages of that sort of bullying emerging in your life again, that sort of domination and you have to step forward against it, when it’s still in its developing stages because you could just not have it happen, that would be better. And so you have to be ready to speak what you have to say, more less on a moment’s notice, you can’t be impulsive about it, like if you and I are talking and if you make a mistake or I made a mistake even if it bothers one of the other, we should just write it off, because it’s like one encounter, what the hell? Maybe you had a bad night’s sleep or something, so you gotta be a little forgiving, but if it happens twice then you should be a little awake and you should remember both times, then if it happens a third time, it’s like that’s when you act, and you say “Look, we talked and this happened and I thought yeah whatever, but then you did it again, and then 2:02 you just did it again”, well then the person has just basically, what are they gonna do, ya know, no? Well maybe they might argue with you, but you kinda got them. And generally, if you just point that out to people, just like that, just that you noticed and are willing to say something about it, they’ll back the hell off, they’ll often apologize and sometimes you even make them even a little more conscious which is like that’s not such a bad idea. That’s what all this means! So this chaos idea, for Jung it was the contents of your unconscious, that might be known as the unknown past, the threatening path that you have never dealt with, might be the threatening future, it might be the threatening present, but Jung realized as he got older that the unconscious was also the world, so the chaos is not only your unconscious mind, which meets the unknown but it’s actually the unknown itself, mingled together, you think , what the hell? That’s why the dragon is a land creature 2:03 and an air creature , its matter and spirit at the same time, and this gets us into constructivism because the constructivists think that basically what happen is that you encounter those elements of the world that don’t fit into your theory and out of those new elements you make the world through your perceptions and you make yourself by incorporating the information and transforming yourself , that’s how Piaget explains the development of a child, the child starts out with some reflexes basic reflexes, manifesting their reflexes produces results in the world, and the child has to reorganize its perceptions to take into account the transformations and so then it gets a little more sophisticated and it can do a few more things, then it can manifest more changes in the world and it tracks them and modifies its perceptions and actions to account for them, it just keeps doing that, that’s how the child boots itself up like a computer does, it’s a very cool idea, and so from the Piagetian stance, the constructivist stance, you can think of the world as a latent 2:04 pool of information, it’s something like that, with the structure obviously that you can interact with your fingers and your body and your eyes and your mouth and you make changes happen and you track them and you model them and you build your skills, and as you continue to do that, in the safety of your house, initially, under the care of your parents who fill in where you’re ignorant, you just emerge, more and more competent and confidant and ready to move ahead, so that’s how the constructivist idea works. So there’s kind of a chaos idea at the bottom of that out of which you emerge and the world emerges at the same time, because you don’t see reality, not at all, you see almost like an animated version of reality, like when I look at you , I just see the front of you , I just see the outside of you, I see you at this height, I don’t see any of your internal structures, I don’t see the back part of you, I don’t see your family, I don’t see 2:05 your history, I don’t see your future, I just see this slice of you, you’re so complicated, I just see this little oversimplified slice of you right now, and I think that’s the reality ! It’s sort of the reality of the way that a Simpson’s character is you! It’s sort of like you! And it’s enough so that you can watch the story, but the real you, man. God only knows what that is and that’s a Jungian idea, that the real you is something that radically transcends the perception of yourself or your conception of yourself and you get to that higher you, at least in part, by going into the darkest place and so it’s a hell of an idea, man. But it’s the old idea of initiation, it’s as old as time, that idea. And there’s something to it, and we definitely recreate it in psychotherapy, like this isn’t an airy theory, it’s quite the contrary because what you do as a psychologist, 2:06 always, always, a behaviorist say, the most logical, clinical type of psychologist, a behaviorist is an initiatory shaman, even though he or she doesn’t know it, and they say well let’s take a look at your life, you’ve got a bunch of problems, and their massive dragons and you’re not going anywhere with those problems you’re just cowering in the corner. And what the behavioral therapist does is cut them, cut that dragon in to little dwarfs, until the dwarfs are small enough so you can kick the hell out of them, but the way they do it is they take the problem and decompose it into elements that are small enough, that you have a reasonable probability of mastering them, so you take the problem apart into its micro problems, careful, careful analytic process and then you think okay, well how can we progress a little bit this week and some of that is to practice facing things you’re afraid of. 2:07 So if you’re agoraphobic, you can’t get on an elevator, you can’t get on a taxi, and you can’t stand up to your husband, and I’m saying husband because most agoraphobics are women, most of them are middle-aged women, and most of them were too dependent for most of their life, so that’s a monster, society, husband, elevator, taxi, subway, it’s a monster and it’s that place which you will not go, and that’s because you feel this high and everything else looks this big and partly it’s because you’ve run away and when you run away, it grows and chases you, which is exactly what happens to a prey animal. If you go in the woods and you find a bear, especially a grizzly, well you’re in real trouble if it’s a grizzly, but if it’s a black bear, if you stand your ground and make a hell of a lot of noise that thing will leave you alone, but if you run, what’s it supposed to think? It eats things that run from it! So that’s exactly where that idea came from, you turn tail and run and the thing that you’re afraid of is really 2:08 a monster and it’s gonna get you and eat you. Well, that’s true psychologically as well, and the same circuits that we used when we were out in the forest even in trees, the same circuits that we used to parse up the world then , into same territory and place where the predators loom, is the way that we parse up the world now, which is safe territory, and the place where the predators loom, it’s become abstracted, way up abstracted, but it’s the same damn circuits, we know this, the same circuits that you use to forage for information, a Dopaminergic circuit is the same circuit that squirrels use is to forage for nuts! And you think: why? Well, it’s because there’s no difference between information and food, like you trade information for food all the time that’s what you’re doing when you’re working, especially if you’re working on a computer. The idea that there’s an equation between information and food is like, well obviously 2:09 there’s an equation between them, so of course you’d use the same circuits, and the damn squirrel has to remember where the nuts are so to him information is food even. So what happened to human beings, we thought: “hey, maybe it’s better to go after information then it is to go after food, because going after information produces more food, then just going after food”, so that was a pretty damn smart idea, so this is what you’re supposed to be doing , and this is what behavior therapists do they decompose your problems, well what are you afraid of, okay you’re afraid of everything, well let’s get something specific you’re afraid of, well I’m afraid of an elevator, okay an elevator, so I have a client she’s afraid of elevator, she sees the elevator door open and says “that’s a tomb!” and I thought “oh wow! I thought it was an elevator!” But for you it’s not a bloody elevator, it’s death! So that’s what you’re afraid of, it’s worse than that. You’re afraid of being trapped inside there in the dark alone, alone. 2:10 Not knowing if anyone’s going to rescue you. Stuck there with your damn imagination, freaking out, and then maybe you have a heart attack because you’re so terrified and you die, it’s like, that’s the elevator! And it’s no bloody wonder someone isn’t going to get into something like that! And then maybe underneath that is your distrust in the mechanisms of society because a normal person, those weird creatures, they’ll get into an elevator, they figure what the hell? They don’t care, because they have an implicit beneath even if the thing stops somebody will come along and rescue them and usually you don’t even think about it right, it’s like huh what the hell? It’s an elevator, it’s like the danger is invisible to them, and it’s partly because you implicitly trust the structure so maybe you go into the unconscious presuppositions of the person whose terrified with of the elevator in the subways and you find out they have a real problem with trusting the authorities in society, that’s partly why they don’t get along with their husband 2:11 and maybe they’ve never been able to stand up for themselves and say maybe you say okay you’re afraid of the damn elevator , but it’s not an elevator , it’s a tomb, and the tomb is partly you and partly the elevator and partly the unconscious mind, so what can you handle? Can you look at an elevator from ten feet away? It’s like yes. Okay how about nine feet away? Yes, five feet, yes. Four feet? No! Okay no problem. Four and a half feet we’re gonna go from that elevator, we’re gonna look at the damn thing until you’re bored of it, you should be bored of the elevator because you’re not afraid of it obviously, it’s an elevator you just don’t notice it. All these things around here that you don’t notice, I could take you out of here and ask you what colour the walls are and you haven’t got any idea. I suspect for most of you, there’s not a chance you’d be able to identify the gender of the person who’s sitting next to you , unless you know them, it’s like you don’t remember anything and why should you? Everything works. 2:12 It’s like, you don’t have to pay attention to it. Is that staying up, yeah it’s still up, yeah it’s still up, it’s like really? No, you get bored of that really quickly, so you just ignore it, but the agoraphobic has just had the veil of ignorance torn away and what they see behind it is mortal threat and so that’s what you’re really helping them deal with. So this week they’re four and a half feet from the elevator, and next week they’re a foot from the elevator, after that , the horrible gates of hell open and they look inside and they don’t run . So hey! They’re tougher than they thought they were and that’s what you’re teaching actually, you’re not teaching them that the world isn’t dangerous because that’s a stupid thing to teach someone, bloody right the world is dangerous! It’s terrifying and sometimes people realize that and the veil lifts and they see horror everywhere, they see that and they think “well I’m just a little rabbit and I’m over here in the corner, I can’t move 2:13 and I’m petrified” and then they can’t move and they hide and cower at home. Because everything has become a predatory domain, so what you teach them is you’re not as much of a rabbit as you think and part of that is that you help them grow some teeth so they can go home and have that fight with their husband that they should’ve had 25 years ago, it happens very frequently, with agoraphobic clients that you get them so they can go in the damn elevator and they can go on the subway and they can take a taxi and maybe they learn to drive, wow! They get some autonomy, then they’re a little tougher, then they can stand up for themselves and they go back and their husband might not be happy with any of this. Really! It depends on what sort of guy he is, if he’s a real tyrant, he might be just perfectly happy with someone who’s afraid of her own shadow because she won’t ever leave! And so that’s a nasty little story, and believe me it’s not uncommon. 2:14 So she gets tougher by facing what she fears and what she finds out is that there’s a hell of a lot more to her than she thought, and that’s really what happens when you do behavior therapy with someone who’s agoraphobic, it isn’t that they get less afraid , it’s that they get braver, that’s way different! Because brave is alert and able to cope, naive is there’s no danger, it’s like oh right there’s no danger, Jesus, what a stupid theory that is . So that’s what all this is, that’s the story, it’s a major story, it’s the story of human transformation and growth, it’s the evolution of mankind! It’s like a major story and we’ve been working on the damn thing for, God only knows for how long! Snakes and primates co-evolved and our vision, our sharp, sharp, sharp vision seems to be an evolutionary adaptation forced on us by the presence of predatory snakes, 2:15 and we’re talking tens of millions of years ago and human beings have unbelievably sharp eye sight, the only thing that can out-see us is birds of prey. And they have eyes like an eagle, they have eyes as big as ours and they have two foveas, the central part of vision. An eagle is all eyes and so… but human beings we’re kinda like that too, half our brain is devoted to visual processing, we have acute vision, in Madagascar where there are primates with no predatory snakes, they’re lemurs, they can’t see worth a damn, and an anthropologist named Lynne Isbell, did a comprehensive study worldwide trying to account for the acuity of primary vision and what she found was that the more predatory snakes in the vicinity, the sharper the eye sight of the primates, so we really have sharp eye sight and that means a lot of us were eaten by snakes and none of your ancestors fortunately, or you wouldn’t be here, but a lot of us fell by the wayside were snake snack and when you’re little 2:16 and living in a tree, a snake is no damn joke, and even now lots of people get bitten by snakes and people are phobic of snakes at quite a rate. And some of that actually seems innate, there’s arguments between psychologists about this but even the ones who don’t accept the fact it’s innate, accept the fact you can make someone afraid of a snake by conditioning, just like that where trying to make them afraid of a flower by conditioning is really, really hard. So we’re at least at minimum prepared to be afraid of snakes and I believe the fear is innate, although you can learn to control it. Anyways, so that’s that story and what a story, man! It’s an amazing, amazing story, you see the den of the dragon is littered here with skulls and bones and that’s what that is, so the thing is no joke, it’s like look the hell out and that’s this! Look it up in the top right hand corner, that’s for Peter Pan right? Well, you remember Captain Hook 2:17 we talked about him already, he’s a tyrant, and he’s a tyrant because he’s afraid of death and that’s all he sees in life and so that makes him cruel and bitter and death has already taken part of him right? That’s why he has a hook and that damn crocodile is chasing him, tick, tick, tick, all the time, and of course that’s the same situation you’re all in. There’s a crocodile with a clock in its stomach, chasing you and it could easily turn you into a tyrant. It can turn you into a tyrant, a cowering victim or a hero. Those are the options, fundamentally. So that’s the Medusa looking at her own reflection, Mother Nature, with the head full of snakes, a terrifying vision. That’s an archetype men get confused with women, that’s the witchy part of a woman, that’s the part that’s attractive, but rejecting, rejecting, rejecting. So many men are petrified by women; they won’t approach them at all. They have no idea how to talk to them. They’re just petrified to immobility 2:18 and that’s way more common than you think and so that breeds resentment like you wouldn’t believe. The guy who shot up Dawson College, it’s like what the hell do you think motivated him? That’s what he saw! It was because, my opinion, it was too god damned useless to be attractive to anyone, so that’s a hell of a place to be in. That’s the problem too, if you’re chronically rejected by people. It’s often because of your own insufficiencies, whether that’s cowardice or lack of social skills or whatever it is, you can’t just brush it off as no one likes me but I’m really okay, it’s like no, no. wrong! If everyone rejects you, there’s probably something wrong. And it’s probably deep and difficult and it’s gonna be horrible to fix. This is not a trivial problem at all. So that’s Mother Nature for men too, because from the sexual selection point of view 2:19 if they’re not selected as a mate, nature has taken them out of the game. Right! So people don’t really like that. They’re not that happy with that. But getting all whiney and violent about it, that’s just not really very helpful although it’s very common. This is Lynn Isbell, an evolutionary arms race between snakes and mammals triggered the development of improved vision and large brain in primates, a radical new theory suggests. These are old representations, I really like this one, I don’t remember, I think it’s Greek, but it doesn’t exactly look Greek, it might be older, it doesn’t matter. Anyways, you see it’s the same thing, the same idea as Graham’s dream right? It’s like there’s this thing that exists, this multi-headed snake, and it’s got this infinite problem, it’s everywhere, that’s that little circle down there, and the problem is, what do you do with it? You cut off one head seven more grow! That’s the eternal problem of life 2:20 and the problem is there is the category of “problems in life” and it ain’t going anywhere and so the question is: can you deal with the whole category at the same time? That’s the thing, that’s how to be in the world, is to deal with that category all at the same time. And so how did human beings, what did they come up with as a solution, that’s so cool too, because the solution they come up not only is the heroism that allows you to approach what you’re terrified by and what you find offensive and to learn from it. But also the idea of sacrifice and that was played out by cultures everywhere, including human sacrifice, and you think what the hell was up with those crazy bastards so long ago? They were sacrificing to Gods all the time, what kind of clueless behavior was that? Burn something and please God, burn something valuable and please God. It’s like what was with them, what were they thinking? Well they weren’t stupid those people, if they were stupid, we wouldn’t be here! They were not stupid and believe me 2:21 they lived under a lot harsher conditions than we do, those were some tough people man.  Back then you’d last about 15 minutes, so you don’t want to think about your ancestors as stupid, there’s no real evidence that they were much different cognitively, than we were 150,000 years ago. So anyways, sacrifice what does that mean? Well it’s a discovery of the future. The future is actually the place where there is threat! And it’s always gonna be there, you make sacrifices in the present so the future is better! Right! Everyone does that, that’s what you’re doing right now, that’s what you’re doing here, that’s what your parents are doing when they pay money to send you to university. They think you can bargain with reality. It’s amazing! You can bargain with reality, you can forestall gratification now! And it’ll pay off at a place and time that doesn’t even exist 2:22 yet! It’s like who would’ve believed that, that’s like a miracle that that occurs, it’s not people figured that out overnight, we were chimps for chrissake! How are we gonna come up with an idea like that, it’s like well we thought about it for 7,000,000 years and we got to the point where we could kinda act it out but we didn’t know what we were doing! But it emerges like a dream, so the terror of the future is a dream and the solution of the dream of the terror of the future is another dream and it comes out in mythology and fantasy and drama where you act out the sacrifice, then it’s a step on the way to full understanding! So we can say sacrifice now, instead of doing it, although we still do, it’s just not concretized like it used to be, we do it abstractly, we all have faith that it will work. And we also set up our society so it’ll work 2:23 and one thing, I’m not a fan of moral relativism for a variety of reasons, partly because I think it’s an extreme form of cowardice, apart from that , no, no, no, there’s minimal ways you can set up a society that’ll work and so one of them is the society has to be set up so that your sacrifices will pay off or you won’t work and then the society will die, so it has to make promises, people have to make promises to one another, and that’s what money is, money is a promise, that your sacrifice will pay off in the future, that’s what money is! And so if the society is stable, you can store up your work right now, you can sacrifice your impulses and you can work and you can store up credit for the future and then you can make the future a better place but society has to be stable enough to allow for that, hyper-inflation will do you in.  So the promise that’s implicit in the currency is the promise that 2:24 what you’re doing now will pay off in the future, and if people don’t have that promise then well we know what they do because in gangs for example, in North America, the time horizon of the gang member shrinks rapidly, because they don’t expect to be alive much past 21 so they get really impulsive and violent and why the hell not? That’s what you do when the future doesn’t matter, you default back to living in them moment and you take what you can get right now and no wonder, because you don’t know if you’re gonna be around in a year and you get whatever you can while you can bloody well get it and that’s like anarchy, that state! Some people like living in that state because they’re wired for that. And so they’re much more comfortable in those conditions, they’re kinda like warrior types in some sense, for most people that’s just, that stress will just do you in, the stress of a life like that. 2:25 That’s a pretty horrible picture, the one of the right, I think. It’s a creepy picture, don’t you think? Seems like creepy picture to me, that’s Quetzalcoatl, an Aztec, dragon God, that’s the eye of Horus, this little thing here, see the Egyptians , they worshipped the eye, yeah well that’s cool, why did they worship the eye? To look the hell up and look at the world that’s your salvation to do that, pay bloody attention, especially to the things you don’t want to pay attention to and use your vision and have some vision and you can use your vision to see into the future! And that’s your redemption, the Egyptians, they didn’t know how to say that. But they knew how to represent it and that’s how they represented it, the pupil on that is completely open, dilated, and that’s a God as far as the Egyptians were concerned, its Horus and I’ll tell you Horus’ story at some point.  2:26 So early primates developed the better eye for color, detail, and movement and you see in three dimensions, traits that are important for detecting threats at close range, humans are descendent from these same primates, alright , so, now the initiation, when you go into psychotherapy, or when you make any supreme moral effort which is roughly the same thing, you have to confront that which you do not know, now I mentioned the pre-cosmogonic chaos and the idea that at the end of Jung’s life, he sort of thought the unconscious and the world as the same, and you think what the hell does the mean, but here’s what it means: so let’s say you’re in a long term intimate relationship and you get betrayed, so what is it that you see when you see your partner at the moment you know of the betrayal? Well you see the pre-cosmogonic chaos, and here’s why: it rattles your unconscious up because you don’t know 2:27 anything anymore, you don’t know what the past was , you don’t what it was  , and it was supposed to be real, but you don’t know what it was , so you come up with wild ideas of what it might be, so you don’t know what the future’s gonna be anymore. So then you’re fantasy fills that space and you don’t know what you’re looking at, that’s for sure, and you don’t know much about human beings, and you certainly don’t know anything about yourself, so all of a sudden, not only is everything in chaos in your mind, but everything is in chaos in your world! And it actually is! And there’s no telling the difference between those two things, and so then, you’re just shattered, so you go talk to a therapist for two years and you think what happened? What was the reality? And the reality is, because who knows what the reality was? But as far as your concerned, I better represent this properly in my head, I better figure out who I was, who that person was, what we did together, and what it meant 2:28 because I do not want this to happen again. And so you’re healed, when you get to the point where you grasp the bloody moral of the story. What went wrong and how can I not have that again? That’s the purpose of learning, that’s the purpose of memory, is to prepare you for the future! And so you have to pull out of that mass of chaos a functional representation that increases your wisdom, so you’re not this naive target, the next time you enter into a relationship so at least you can have another relationship, without being so traumatized, that you’re done! And it can take years for people to talk people through that because this landscape of potential opens up with their traits, anything could have been the truth. Well just sort through that. You have to wander through all that mess and it’s really painful and emotional, you have to sort through all that mess  2:29 and come out with the new you, the renewed you, and so well this is a representation of it, this is how people act this out, but whatever method he may have been designated the Shaman is recognized as such, as only after having received two methods of instruction the first is ecstatic, dreams trances and visions, the second is traditional, shamanic techniques, functions of the spirit, mythology and genealogy of the clan and the secret language. This happens to you even if you encounter something terrible like a betrayal, what happens is that you have to journey into the domain of morality, how did I act and how did that person act and how should’ve they acted and how should’ve I acted and that’s part of your cultural structure. That’s the idea of rescuing the dead father from the depths right? And we’ll show you some examples of that. 2:30 This is a critical issue, in regards to the shamanic transformation, is that people go through these terrible experiences, often drug induced by the way, with regards to the shaman, they usually use psychedelic chemicals in one form or another, often mushrooms, but they’ve come up with other strange concoctions like Iowaska, down in the amazon. Iowaska is an amazing substance, it’s made of the bark of thing , and the plant of whose name I don’t remember, that hardly even grow in the same place, that have to be cooked together in a special way. And no one has any idea how the damn amazonians figured that out, it looks impossible! If you ask them and they say the plants told us how to do it. Which western people don’t find very helpful but the shamans are perfectly happy with that description and Iowaska takes them apart and it does that in part because it affects the Serotonergic system very powerfully like all psychedelics do and it transports them to another world. 2:31 That’s how they interpret it. And what we know about psychedelics we could throw in a thimble and throw the thimble away, we know nothing about psychedelics, there’s new experiments going on at John-Hopkins for example, with psilocybin, which is this active chemical in magic mushrooms , same structure basically as LSD and mescaline, all the real psychedelics have the basically same structure except the one that’s derived from Amanita muscaria which is called muscarinic acid and it’s its own weird thing that no one knows anything about. Anyways, they have profound neuro chemical effects in very small doses, the research group at John Hopkins has given psilocybin to research subjects, purified psilocybin because they started the new experimentation with psychedelics and that’s been banned for like 40 years because psychedelics have been terrifying to our culture that we just put them away and it’s like whoa we’re not going there! So even from a research perspective 2:32 even though some of the psychedelics like very promising for the treatment for the disorder of alcoholism and they recently used psilocybin to help people stop smoking at John Hopkin’s and I think they had an 80% success rate which is just like absolutely mind boggling but if you give people psilocybin and they have a mystical experience which is very common among people who take these sorts of chemicals then their personality transforms permanently such that one year later they’re one standard deviation higher in openness and openness is the creativity dimension and that seems to be a permanent transformation so that’s really remarkable, about 80% of people who undergo the John Hopkin’s experiments report that the experience is like one the two most important things that’s every happened to them and so, well that’s something! There’s this guy named Rick Strassman at the University of Texas, and he did experimentation with DMT, Dimethyltryptamine, if I remember correctly, is the active ingredient in Iowaska and 2:33 you produce it in your brain and it’s in plants, it’s like a very common chemical. But DMT is a weird Hallucinogen, because it has an extraordinarily short mechanism of action, and people who take it report that they’re blasted out of their body, like out of a cannon and they go out somewhere and encounter beings of various sorts and then ten minutes later they’re back, virtually everyone reports that, which is really strange and so Strassman was giving people DMT intravenously so that the trip would last longer. This was all NIH funded experimentation all cleared with the relevant ethics boards all within the last ten years and he basically quit doing it because he was a pretty straight scientist, he was measuring heart rate pulse, and all that sort of thing, trying to look at the physiology, the people he was giving these chemicals to kept coming back and telling him these crazy stories and 2:34 well it was too much for him. And no wonder! They all said the same thing and he would say that was a dream and they would say “no that was the most real thing that happened to me” and he would say “it’s an archetypal experience” and they’d say “no, no, that was no archetypal experience, I went somewhere else and I saw things and I’m back and I don’t care what you think” and who the hell knows right? Because it’s all subjective. But the weird thing about it is that everyone’s reporting the same thing, how the hell do you account for that? And the shaman when they take these psychedelic chemicals, they basically say the same thing, well first of all it more or less killed me, that’s this, I dissolved to a skeleton then I climbed a tree that unites heaven and Earth and then went to the realm of the Gods and they gave me some information and I’m back, it’s like okay we don’t really know what to make of that, and certainly that’s what Eliade describes when he describes the Shamanic procession, the shamanic initiation, 2:35 there’s dissolution to a skeleton first, then a death, like a symbolic death, experienced as an actual death and bang, up into the realm of the Gods and then they come back, it’s a very old idea, that’s a medieval representation of the tunnel people travel to at the end of their life to find the light, which is a very common near death experiences report, people don’t have any idea what to do with those reports, except say it’s the paroxysms of the dying brain , which you’d expect to be a hell of a lot more random in my opinion and the idea is there’s a rebirth after that, and here this is the Scandinavian representation, it has snakes down here, and they’re eating it and then that’s the Amazonian representation, it’s like how the hell do you account for that? Those pictures are so similar that it’s just beyond belief! 2:36: Well we lived in trees for a long time a long, long, long, long time, millions of years and there were lots of snakes around them and so the idea that reality is a tree that surrounded by a snake, that’s in us man! It’s down there, its deep! There’s something about it that’s true and not true in the way that we normally think of truth, true in an entirely different manner, so all that is pretty damn strange. We’ll stop with this. My son drew this when he was 7 years old! Blew me away, man! I thought it was so cool, so I had it laminated, and so here’s what it is, on the right hand side, here’s order, it’s like the yin yang thing, that’s order, left side chaos, right? And those are all mushroom houses, which I thought was amazing! And then there’s this river that runs right down the middle like the line for order and chaos and then there’s this tree that goes up to heaven and that’s heaven up there! There’s St. Peter, there’s the pearly gates, there’s the clouds, he never went to church, ya know! 2:37 It’s like what the hell?! And then there’s a little bug that goes up and down from heaven to earth and that was him, and I thought he had a very organized psyche, that kid, he was a very stable, and he drew that and I thought Jesus, that’s just bloody well unbelievable! And I still think when I look at that and that’s a great example of an archetype and so we’ll see you Tuesday…This lecture is called Virtue as a Necessity. And the reason I gave it that title is because virtue, ethics, morality isn’t a field of study. It’s a mode of being upon which all fields of study rest. It’s also a mode of being upon which everything you do in your life rests.  The way you understand yourself or fail to, the way you understand other people or fail to. And more deeply than that, what role it is that you play in your life in the world.One of the things I’ve learned for example, being a clinical psychologist (I’ve spent thousands of hours helping people sort out difficult problems), is that lack of virtue makes people ill. I’m not saying that my clients themselves lacked virtue, I suppose some of them do and some of them don’t, but to the degree that they’re embedded in a network of relationships where virtue is fundamentally absent, they’re tortured and tormented and they’re unable to find firm ground.  And that’s not a biological problem, although biologically fragile people might be hurt more by a lack of virtue.A lot of what you do in a real relationship with people, and at least to some degree in a clinical relationship is supposed to be real, is to provide a forum where people tell the truth. And that’s hard because people don’t like to tell the truth particularly – the truth is difficult. It’s difficult for a variety of reasons.When I first thought about this lecture, I had a slightly different title. The title was Virtue as an Existential Necessity. And that’s a bit philosophical so I modified it. But there’s a reason for that because the concept of virtue means to be virtuous; existentialism is the study of being. I think that you can’t really understand what makes up virtue until you modulate or modify your notion of what constitutes being. This is a hard thing to do.Modern people are fundamentally materialistic. And there’s some utility in that: we’re masters of material transformation. And the fact that we’re materialist in our scientific philosophy has made us extremely powerful, maybe too powerful, for our morality. Extremely powerful from a technological perspective, but it’s blinded us to certain things. And I think one of the things that it’s really blinded us to is the nature of our own being. Because we make the assumption that the fundamental constituent elements of reality are material. We fail to notice that the fundamental constituent elements of our own reality are not material. They’re emotional, they’re motivational, they’re dreams, they’re visions, they’re relationships with other people. They’re conscious: they’re dependent on consciousness. And self-consciousness. And we have absolutely no materialist explanation whatsoever either for consciousness or self-consciousness. And we don’t deal well, from a materialist perspective, with the qualities of being. And everyone knows those qualities exist, I mean for most people there’s nothing more real than their own pain. Pain transcends rational argument in that you can’t argue yourself out of it: it’s just there. And, materialist or not, there are very few people who are willing to allow the claim that their pain is merely an epiphenomena of some more fundamental material process. Pain is fundamental. Consciousness is fundamental. And I think that unless you understand that, you can’t think properly about virtue.So I might start the discussion about virtue with a discussion about being. Well, what does human being look like? Well, the Buddhists say life is suffering – that’s the first fundamental Buddhist dictum. And I suppose a modern person would tend to think of that as a very pessimistic claim. But I found when I shared that information with my students, once they understand what it means, it’s actually a relief because people run around madly, suffering  away, and all of them inside their little shell think ‘Well, there must be something wrong with me because here I am suffering and that isn’t how things are supposed to be.’ Well then, you might say ‘Who says that’s not the way things are supposed to be?’ The Buddhists say life is suffering. So what that means is, if you’re not suffering, that’s a good thing, that’s lucky, that’s fortunate, that’s not the way of the world. That may be something to be grateful for, ecstatic about even.And of course in Christianity, the central symbol of Christianity is the crucifix, which is not a positive symbol in any way: it’s a symbol of betrayal by friends, opposition from the state and mortal vulnerability. It’s about as powerful a symbolic representation of the idea that life is suffering that you could put together, which is of course why the power of that symbol extends across several thousand years.Judaism: I don’t think it’s going to come as a shock to anyone in the audience that Jews are acutely aware of the suffering that’s involved in life. So it’s useful to know, to understand what it means that life is suffering. It’s a fundamental ontological truth. It’s a fundamental statement about the nature of being. And there’s a reason for that, it’s not incomprehensible, it’s perfectly comprehensible. We’re finite. We have a lifespan that’s bounded temporally, we have maybe a hundred years and that’ll pretty much be it.And then there’s other forms of extreme limitation that are imposed on you that have very little to do with you. They’re arbitrary facts of being. You’re a certain height, you’re a certain weight, you’re a certain amount of attractive, a certain amount of intelligent, you’re a certain amount of athletic, you’re a certain amount of mentally ill, you’re a certain amount of pre-disposition to cancer. And it’s frequently the case that people like to attribute those vulnerabilities to some flaw in their own nature, but what they are instead is conditions of existence.Human being is predicated on a kind of fundamental limitation in that we are what we are and we’re not other things. And so that means inevitably that the awareness of human being comes along with suffering. And life poses the question: ‘How to conduct yourself in the face of suffering?’. Not only yours, but everyone elses. And it’s an inescapable question, except maybe you’re fortunate and you’ll have periods of time where something absolutely horrible isn’t happening to you.Now you think about this, because you might think this is pessimistic, but it’s not pessimistic. It’s actually one of the most freeing things that you can realize. Maybe there’s nothing particularly wrong with you at the moment, but there’s a high probability that you have a family member that has something seriously wrong with them. And there’s a very high probability that if you don’t, you will soon. Maybe you have a partner that has something seriously wrong with them. And to know this frees you from the false illusion that life can be conducted without suffering.Suffering’s an integral part of being. Well, why is that? Who knows? It’s a metaphysical question, but I have some ideas about it that have helped me and there are things that I have read. I read for example an old Jewish commentary about the reason for creation. It’s like a zen koan, this idea. You take a being with the classical attributes of God: omnipotence, omnipresence and omniscience, a totality. And the question is: what does a being with those attributes lack? And the answer is limitation. And then you think, well what’s so important about limitation? If you can be anything or do anything at anytime whatsoever, there’s no being. Everything is one thing. There’s no differentiation between things. So something that’s absolute and total has no being, it has to be parceled out into limited being. And you know this because you all play games, you play video games, you play games with other people, you may play games you don’t even know you’re playing. And when you play those games you put limits on yourself, you play by a set of rules. And the reason you do that is when you limit yourself, arbitrarily in some ways, whole new worlds of possibility emerge. And so there’s a powerful metaphysical idea that being is not possible without limitation.So that’s an interesting idea. So you say well what’s the price you pay for being? The price you pay for being is limitation and the price you for limitation is suffering, so the price you pay for being is suffering.So what’s the problem with that? Well, suffering makes people question the validity of life. Everyone does that. If something terrible is happening to you, you’re going to wonder why you? That’s for sure.  Why not you might be a better question because it’s inevitable, but you will wonder that: why you and you’ll wonder is it worth it? Especially if what’s happening to you is terrible and prolonged. Is it worth it? Does that cost that you have to pay for being justify itself? And therefore is being justifiable? And everybody asks and answers these questions. In fact the process of asking and answering those questions underlies everything you do all the time. Because you’re answering when you act one answer which is yes, being justifies itself. You’re answering a different way sometimes when you act which is no, being does not justify itself.And the question then might be, what happens when you answer one of those two ways. Well, to untangle this, the first thing I want to do is talk to you about the antithesis of virtue because it’s always struck me that when you’re talking about something that could conceivably be regarded as optimistic, it’s difficult for people to fundamentally believe you. You know, if I stood on stage and said “Well, the purpose of life is to be happy.” you might find that vaguely comforting, but there’s no chance in the world that you’d believe it if you have an ounce of sense because if you’ve lived you know that there will be periods of time where happiness is not your state. And so there has to be more to life than happiness because there’ll be a lot of your life that isn’t happy.Alexander Solzhenitsyn,  who wrote the book The Gulag Archipelago, that was one of the axes that brought down the thick tree of communist utopianism said the idea that human beings are made for happiness, that’s a philosophy that’s undermined by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel. And what he meant by that was, if you find yourself in a particularly terrible situation (you’re enslaved for example by malevolent utopians). And they’re pushing you into a form of slavery and they’re beating you to attain their ends. The idea that you’re made for happiness is not going to be of much comfort under those circumstances. And so, Solzhenitsyn’s point was you’re weakened by your belief that life is for happiness because that philosophy cannot sustain any sustained challenge and you will for sure encounter such a sustained challenge.I do think that modern people can believe in virtue, but not easily, because virtue sounds religious in  a sense and we have real trouble, whether we’re religious or not, with religious preconceptions because our scientific forms of knowledge and our fundamental materialism has really radically undermined our ability to believe in any transcendent being.But one thing that modern people can believe in, I think without much difficulty at all, is evil. Solzhenitsyn said, for example, that the most important event of the 20th century, as far as he was concerned, was the Nuremburg judgement. And you may know, you should know, that after World War 2 a group of National Socialists from Germany, who were deemed particularly responsible for the absolute horrors of the final solution and the mass factory genocide that accompanied it, were put on trial. And a standard defense for their actions was ‘Well, I was ordered to do it.’ And the Nuremburg decision denied human beings, regardless of their ethnicity or national background or beliefs, the legal right to use that as a defense, under certain limited circumstances.And the argument was that there are some things that are so self-evidently not good, not virtuous, that if you engage in them you’re existentially guilty. You’re guilty outside the bounds of your culture.There’s a transnational and transethnic morality. We don’t know what it is, but we know what it isn’t. It isn’t pointless torture and genocide.At minimum to be virtuous is to live your life in such a way that the probability that you would engage in such actions, given the opportunity, is minimized.Now people think, well they’re already doing that. If they were in Nazi Germany they would have been a rescuer, not a perpetrator. But that’s wrong. You could take this audience and put them back in 1939 or thereabouts and 90% of you, 95% of you, 99% of you would either be in the perpetrator class or the going along with the perpetrator class. And you may sit and believe you’d be in the one percent, and maybe you would because how do I know, but that isn’t how the historical facts sort themselves out.And it turns out that it’s not that difficult generally to put people in a situation, normal people, where they’ll do something that really doesn’t look very good. Those of you who are familiar with psychology know about the Milgram experiments, for example. You know about the Zimbardo prison experiments: you take perfectly normal college students and put them into a situation that they know is a dramatic farce, they know isn’t real, give some of them the power of prison guards and make some others arbitrarily into prisoners and in three days you have to shut the whole experiment down because the prison guards have turned into Nazis and they’re enjoying torturing the prisoners even though they know (whatever know means) that they’re innocent.That says something about the manner in which people conduct their existence. They’re very susceptible to malevolent action.If you look at Genesis, a very old book, a very influential book. There’s a strange sequence of events that befalls Adam and Eve. It’s in two sentences. A snake gives them an apple. And that wakes them up. Well, there’s a good book by a southern California primatologist that was just published last year that suggested the reason that humans have such great vision, way better than most animals except for raptors (birds), is because our visual systems were designed to detect predatory snakes. And the way she discovered that was by comparing the populations of predatory snakes around the world to the visual acuity of the primate groups that lived in those areas. And what she found was essentially a one to one correspondence.Our visual system, which is the ability to see, and to be enlightened let’s say (because enlightenment for example is associated with vision) – the snake gave that to us because we had to pay attention to predatory things that were after us for tens of millions of years. And fruit, that’s interesting. We have colour vision because we were fruit eaters. Our colour vision is precisely evolved to detect ripe fruit.So that part of the story is right. There’s a story that involves women too, but I’m not going to tell that one today. You have to be awake to outsmart women. That’s the story. And so that’s why they’re tangled in there with the serpents and the fruit.What happens when Adam and Eve wake up? It’s a series of strange things. The first thing that happens is the scales fall from their eyes so they can see, all of a sudden they’re awake in a way they weren’t before. And the next thing that happens is that they realize they’re naked. Now one of the things that people have nightmares about is being naked on a stage. Which is often why when you see people on a stage they don’t tell you anything they think. Because they don’t only not want to be physically naked, they don’t want to be metaphysically naked either. And they protect themselves from the inquiring eyes of the audience. No one likes to be naked on stage. Why?Well to be naked is to have your defenses stripped from you. When the Soviets wanted to really torture the hell out of you at two o’clock in the morning, they’d cave in your door and then they’d strip you and shave you when they got you to prison because once you were exposed in all your suffering catastrophe, then you were much easier to torture.To be naked, to realize you are naked, is to realize that you’re vulnerable. That’s why Adam and Eve immediately cover themselves up. They realize they’re naked, they cover themselves up: it’s a story about culture. Once people woke up and realized their limitations, their mortal limitations (which is also their knowledge of death), the first thing they do is cover themselves up.And the second thing that happens is they know the difference between good and evil. And that’s a strange thing. It’s not good and bad. It’s good and evil specifically. It’s also something that animals don’t know. And I think, I thought about this really for 20 years, what does that mean? And then earlier this year I think I figured it out, what it means is you don’t know how to torture people until you realize that you’re vulnerable. As soon as you’re self-conscious of your own vulnerability, then you can take what might only be a predatory act, say on the part of a wolf because a wolf will bring down a moose or something like that and eat it, and drag that out into three months of artistic torturing. And so that means that your recognition of your own vulnerability immediately allows you to determine what’s evil.Then you might ask yourself under what conditions would you be likely to manifest that drive? I think that’s easy to figure out if you watch yourself. If you watch yourself without presuppositions, which means to watch yourself honestly, or to watch yourself as if you’re someone you don’t know. Because you don’t know yourself because you’re too complicated to know yourself anyways, so you might as well just come right out and know that. One of the things that’s kind of useful about recognizing your capacity for evil, if you can do that without traumatizing yourself, is that it’s the pathway for recognizing your ability for good. You don’t get to one without the other. Because you have no idea what you’re like before you know how terrible you can be and not only that, you won’t take yourself sufficiently seriously. If you know you’re a loaded weapon, and an unstable loaded weapon, then you’re much more likely to pay attention to what you do.But that means you’re not particularly nice. And it means that if you were given the opportunity, maybe you would have been a Nazi prison guard.In Genesis, the first thing that happens after Adam and Eve wake up is that they have two sons, Cain and Abel. And Cain, who’s Abel’s brother, he doesn’t get along very well with God. Now I don’t really care if you believe in God, because I don’t really know what people mean when they say they believe in God anyways, but the story goes that Cain doesn’t get along very well with God and the reason for that is Cain keeps doing things and they don’t work. Everything Cain touches turns to ash whereas his brother Abel, God likes him (God only knows why) , and everything goes really well for Abel. So Cain is kind of a failure and Abel’s a smashing success and not only is he successful at everything he does, but he’s a good guy too, which is really rude because if you’re really successful at things you should at least be wretched intrapersonally so that people can forgive you.So Cain takes this for a decade or two and then he’s just had it, he’s had it with God. He thinks ‘How can God make this sort of universe where I’m breaking myself in half here and getting nowhere and my brother – doors open for him left, right and center.’ So he goes and complains to God and he says ‘Look, what’s going on, what sort of reality did you conjure up here? Abel has it good, I’m having a miserable time, maybe you should do something about it.’And you think, that’s pretty interesting you know, that Cain would think that, because you have to ask yourself what sort of presumption does Cain have to assume that the dismal quality of his being is attributable to God? Because what Cain does in that instant is to make himself the judge of being. And I would say that you should be cautious about making yourself the judge of being because there’s always the possibility that there’s a few things you don’t know.So God sort of lets Cain in on the secret. He says ‘Look, the fact that you’re suffering miserably away actually isn’t my fault, it’s your fault.’ He says to Cain ‘Sin crouches at the door like a predatory cat ready to jump on you, but if you wanted to, you could overcome it.’ This is not what Cain wants to hear. Cain wants to hear that he’s an innocent character and he has nothing to do with his own misery and it’s all God’s fault and God says instead “straighten the hell up, you know you could do it”. And even though you know you could do it you won’t. And so that’s that for Cain. He was upset when he first went into the discussion, but after he got this little piece of news that his suffering was to be laid at his own doorstep, then he’s out of the realm of human and the story says ‘his countenance falls’, which means he’s angry and upset.And the first thing he does is run off and kill Abel. Why? Well, it’s revenge. Abel is God’s favourite and Cain has already judged being and found it wanting. The best way he can express his desire for revenge is to find someone who’s having a pretty good time of it and to arbitrarily eliminate them. And it might be of some interest to note one of Cain’s grandchildren is the first persons who makes weapons of war.So that brilliant little story, so long ago associates the moral failings of the resentful individual who’s unwilling to take responsibility for the nature of their own being, directly with atrocious acts of social conflict. And that’s another thing to know, because if you’re going to be virtuous you have to take yourself seriously. And if you start to understand that you’re networked with other people, that you’re not one little dot among seven billion, you’re networked with other people. So you know a thousand people and they know a thousand people and so you’re two people away from a million people and three people away from a billion people. You’re in a causal network and all your actions matter.And Solzhenitsyn said there’s as many centers of the universe as there are individual consciousnesses. That’s a very interesting way to think and why can’t it be that way? We don’t know anything about consciousness and certainly seems to be how it feels if you’re one of those conscious centers and so maybe it is that what you do matters.I think that often people come to the conclusion that life is meaningless because that’s a better conclusion to come to than the reverse. Because if life is meaningless, well then, who cares what you do. But if life is meaningful, if what you do matters, then everything you do matters. And that puts a terrible responsibility on the individual and I think that people are generally unwilling to bear that.So life is suffering. What does that do to people? It makes them resentful. These are pitfalls of being. Except being has a structure. One of its fundamental structural elements is suffering. But suffering produces other characteristics of being: resentment is a characteristic of being. People feel resentful when they believe that they’ve been taken advantage of. And if you feel resentful, it may be that you are being taken advantage of.  It may also be that you should screw your head on straight and look at things properly. And it may also be that you should talk to somebody to find out if you’re being taken advantage of or if your head just isn’t screwed on straight. But to talk to them then you have to tell them the truth and in order to tell them the truth you have to have practised being honest. Because if you haven’t practised being honest, then you’re not going to have a friend that you can talk to and even if you did, you’re not going to be able to tell them what the problem is. And then they won’t be able to help you sort out whether or not you’re being taken advantage of or whether you’re a little bit insane.If you’re resentful then maybe you have to tell the person who’s taking advantage of you that they should stop doing that. And maybe you have to tell them in a way that will make them stop, which is no easy thing. Or maybe you’re resentful because you’re a nasty little bit of the world and you have a chip on your shoulder and no matter what people do with you you’re resentful, in which case you have some internal restructuring to do. And you might ask, why should you do the restructuring? And my answer to that is resentment, along with hopelessness and nihilism and all sorts of other moral pitfalls, puts you on the road to cruelty and atrocity. Misery loves company. And if you feel that things are fundamentally unjust and that the slings and arrows of being are aimed specifically at you, why should you treat anyone else with compassion or justice? Because things are fundamentally unfair. And even more deeply, why shouldn’t you conclude that things should be eradicated because fundamentally they’re unfair.I think that’s what Hitler concluded. I also think that’s what Stalin concluded. And the evidence suggests that Stalin was gearing up for the Third World War, he had hydrogen bombs, he’d already killed 30 million people. He had his practise trials.And you know, there’s an old psychoanalytic idea and the idea is that if you can’t understand the motivations for the behavior, look at the outcomes and infer the motivations. And so Hitler killed a 100 million people if you include the whole Second World War and God only knows how many Stalin killed and Mao killed more than Stalin.Why? Well their cover story was Utopia. And I guess people believed that. Well, why? It didn’t look very utopian when all those millions of people were dying. I think all those people who participated in those processes used their rational utopianism as a cover story for their willingness to participate in the atrocity. Because what they wanted to do was participate in the atrocity, they didn’t give a damn about Utopia.And you ask yourself, well, how much do you try to force the world to behave according to your terms?Now the Catholics have always had trouble with rationality and modern people, especially the sort of hyper-atheists that you hear from now and then. They don’t like that because they believe that rationality is the highest virtue and that’s wrong. I mean it’s a terrible thing to say in a university, except maybe the university isn’t here to teach you to be rational, maybe it’s here to teach you to be virtuous. And those aren’t the same thing.The rational person says, well I understand and having understood I impose an order and then I work to make that imposed order a reality. That’s what every ideologue does, it’s what every utopian does.  It’s convincing and I think the reason people do that is well, it’s complicated, partly they want an explanation for their being. But more importantly than that they want a mask that covers up their tendency to atrocity with the appearance of virtue. And most utopian thinking is of that sort, even though the mask can be very well argued.And you ask me why I believe that and the reason I believe that is because we had a hundred years of it and that’s how it turned out.One of the things that was terrible about living in the Soviet Union was that you couldn’t suffer because things were perfect. So if you were suffering and you even admitted it, then you were instantly an enemy of the state. So if you’re an ideologue, your own suffering makes you a heretic. You undermine your belief in your own bloody system by suffering. Well, then that’s fine. If your own belief can stop you from suffering then more power to you, but if you’re still suffering a bit, or a lot, or a tremendous amount, then you can ask yourself ‘Maybe there’s something I don’t know?’Here’s an existential exercise. And this is not rational. Let’s say that virtue is worth pursuing. And it’s worth pursuing because a virtuous path is the only path that justifies being to itself. That’s the definition of virtue. A virtuous path justifies being to itself. Being is suffering. So you need a justification for your suffering. So then you might ask yourself ‘Are there times in my life when I feel that my suffering is justified?’ And this is a good question. And you could ask yourself the reverse question too, which is ‘are there times in my life when my suffering is clearly not justified?’And I could say, well watch yourself for three weeks. Just watch like you don’t know anything. And see when you’re somewhere that justifies itself. Now, you might say ‘How do I know?’ and I’d say ‘Okay, here’s some hints. You’re not self-conscious.  You know it’s not good to be self-conscious, right? It loads on neuroticism. It’s a negative emotion. We think of it as a higher order cognitive function, but people find it unpleasant. You tend to be self-conscious when you’re false or ashamed. If you’re deeply engaged in something, your self-consciousness disappears. So engagement in something meaningful appears to make self-consciousness vanish. It also makes time vanish, right? Because if you’re doing something that is intrinsically meaningful, then the sense of passing time disappears. And so that temporal limitation that plagues you, vanishes.And I could say maybe you’re having a miserable time of it and you’ve only spend two percent of your waking hours in that condition. And maybe you don’t even know when that is. But you could watch. You could see and say ‘Hey, look – I spent ten minutes there and I hardly even noticed and I felt that the nature of my being justified itself.’ Well maybe you wouldn’t say that to yourself, but you could. You could say ‘That was worth it.’ And then I could say ‘Well, practise that.’ Above all else, forget about everything else.And then there’s an alternative exercise. Pay attention and figure out when absolutely you’re being does not justify itself. That’s even easier. Because that’ll happen whenever you do something that you immediately regret or are ashamed of or even more precisely, makes you feel disintegrated and devalued.Nietzsche said people betray themselves for the sake of their good name all the time. You can feel this, it seems to center in your solar plexus. When you say something or do something that is not virtuous, then you’ll disintegrate and then you’re weak and you can feel that. And then you’ll cover it up with a bunch of rattling arguments trying to convince yourself and other people that what you were doing was actually okay. But you know. And it’s your rational arrogance and authoritarianism that forces you to not drop your stupid presuppositions and just pay attention to what your being is revealing to you.We don’t think that way. We don’t think being reveals things. It reveals things all the time. We just don’t pay any attention. Why? Well I think we really don’t want the responsibility. I really believe (I thought about this for a long time), I really believe that that’s the case.Here’s a quote from the Toa Te Ching, I have a great translation of this book, it was written by Loa Tse years and years ago. It’s one of the world’s classics of literature. The person who wrote this wasn’t a philosopher, the person who wrote this was a master of being. That’s a different thing because a philosopher thinks, but a master of being doesn’t think because thinking is a tool and being is something that supersedes any tool.He said ‘It is by sheathing intellect’s bright light that the sage remains at one with his own self, ceasing to be aware of it. By placing it behind, detached, he is unified with his external world. By being selfless, he is fulfilled, thus his selfhood is assured.’I show my students in my Maps of Meaning class Pinocchio. Pinocchio’s a very complicated story in the Disney version and in the previous versions, with a deep mythological base. One of the things that happens in Pinocchio (a lot of strange things happen that people just swallow, right? There’s a puppet that turns into a human being, there’s talking cats, there’s blue fairies, there’s stars, there’s whales that eat people) and everyone swallows that with no problem, right? You go to see Pinocchio you don’t even notice that a puppet has just gone into a whale and you know, what the hell’s going on? And the reason you don’t notice that is because it means something and you don’t know what it means but you know that it means something and you’re willing to ride on it. Weirdly enough, because it compromises your rational principles completely. It does. These are religious experiences that people have in movie theatres, they suspend disbelief, they go along with it. It’s not rational, but they believe it. If someone says ‘But that’s not real.’ you say to them ‘Maybe you could shutup so I could watch the movie.’You don’t want their rationality interfering, it’s the wrong time for it, it’s the wrong place for it. Geppetto wishes that his pet puppet could become real. It’s a very unlikely wish, which is something he says, very unlikely to happen. Actually I think Jiminy Cricket says that. To have that happen, Geppetto has to wish on a star. It’s a strange idea. The star is something that partakes of the divine. You could say that if you look at the night sky, where you can really see it, you know that, right? You look at the night sky and infinity opens itself up before you and there’s nothing to say except…there’s nothing to say.And to wish on a star is to put your eyes above the horizon and to pick a transcendent point and to wish for something, to want for something that’s beyond the concrete and immediate. And to become virtuous and not be a puppet is to aim at something transcendent. I could say, well at least it’s the absence of evil, that’s something. Well, maybe it’s even more than that. Maybe it’s virtue in and of itself.There’s a line in the Sermon on the Mount (it’s a very strange sermon) and the line is ‘Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil therof.’ It’s a very strange piece of advice, it sounds completely impractical, right? Limit the focus of your consciousness to the day and leave the worries alone. It means something meditative I think. When I do therapy with people, I try to do this, I don’t think because I don’t know if…I do sometimes, but I shouldn’t… I don’t necessarily know what their problem is or what they should do about it. But I can listen and if I listen (and maybe I learned this in part from Carl Rogers’ writings), if I listen then thoughts will occur to me. I’m not thinking them, it’s different. I’m letting the thoughts come up. I tell my clients, ‘Try to tell me the truth and I’ll try to listen without being too much of a son of a bitch and maybe, you know, maybe we can work something out.’ And then they’ll say something to me and maybe I’ll think ‘Well that thing you said now and that thing you said half an hour ago don’t seem to be coherent, so maybe you could straighten that out’ or you know, it seems more like I’m tracking what they’re saying and when I’m listening to them I’m in the same place they are. We know the neural mechanisms for that. You are in the same place as someone when you really listen to them. And then thoughts come up and I tell them what they are and it’s impersonal because I’m not trying to get them to do anything particularly. I’m just aiming maybe at helping them figure out what’s going on and having a little bit less suffering. It’s not the imposition of an ideological structure. And the idea behind this particular piece of advice is, you can try this too, you wake up in the morning and you think okay, this could be a good day (whatever that means). You don’t know, right, what a good day is? But maybe you’ve had a couple and they’re not so bad and so maybe you think you could have another one. But you don’t know and you think, okay – you ask yourself, and this is meditative ‘What is it that I need to do today so that this would be a good day?’And your brain will tell you. It’ll say ‘You know that bill that’s hiding under five pieces of paper on your desk? You should haul that sucker out and pay it.’ Or there’s something you’re avoiding that makes you anxious that your brain will pick up on right away and say ‘You have to do these whatever number of commitments today, and if you do them then you’ve fulfilled your obligations.’ And the idea behind this piece of advice is that if you fulfill your obligations everyday then you don’t have to worry about the future. And that’s a very interesting idea. It’s predicated on the notion that there’s a wisdom inside of people that’s deeper than mere rationality. And I believe that to be the case because we’re far older than mere rationality from an evolutionary perspective, from any perspective you want. We’re deeper than rationality.And we know, psychologists have learned in the last 20 years, rationality is bounded ridiculously in all sorts of different ways. It’s not the master, it’s a servant. It’s an unruly servant, even though it can be a very powerful one.The totality of you, the wisdom that’s embodied in the totality of you, far outstrips rationality. And if you listen to yourself, and do the difficult things that your self tells you to do, the idea is you don’t have to compute the utopian future because it’s following whatever  you tell yourself to do every moment is the best path to whatever the best outcome is.It’s a strange way of thinking because if you’re a utopian and a rationalist you already know what the right outcome is. Then you have to run around pointing guns at people to make bloody sure they do the right things so that the outcome you’ve computed occurs. And that doesn’t seem to work very well.And so you see this idea in Daoism too, the idea is to give up the end. Because you don’t know what it is. And you don’t – it’s an admisison of ignorance. Where are you headed? You don’t know. But that doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t be headed somewhere.Follow your moral intuitions. Stop doing the things that make you feel weak. I’m not talking about following a moral code, although that can come into it if you really don’t know what the hell you’re doing at all. Then following a moral code is a good idea because it’ll at least get the ball rolling. It’s a form of apprenticeship.So, you know, not doing the obviously bad things is a form of discipline. It isn’t the notion that I’m talking about now, this is a different thing. This is pay attention to what’s meaningful because you can see what that is. You may find you’re terrified of it because everybody’s got this little secret wish…’I really love doing…’ I don’t know what it is. It’s different things for different people, but they’re afraid to do it, because as soon as you do what you really love, then you expose your nakedness, right? You say this is what I really like. Instead you just shove that under the bed and do something you don’t care about at all and then if people judge you, it doesn’t matter.But the problem with that is there’s no life there. There’s no force. There’s no you. And without that the suffering will do you in and then you will become a bad person and that’s not a good thing.So you have to see what it is that you find meaningful, whatever that is. And then you have to fight for it. You have to fight against yourself, you have to fight against other people because what do they know about it? You have to fight against nature maybe even to stand up for what it is that sustains you. And that takes courage. It also takes honesty. Partly because if you’re not honest you can’t trust your own intuitions. And this is an important thing. Think about this and this is why virtue is a necessity.If you lie to yourself or to other people, then you corrupt the structure that you use to interact with being. You corrupt it. And if you corrupt it, then if you listen to it, it will guide you to the wrong way. Or maybe it’ll be so corrupted you can’t listen to it at all and then you’ll have to listen to somebody else. And that might not be a good thing, especially if you’re already corrupted. Because then you’ll listen to the person who tells you to do what you really want to do but won’t admit it to yourself.And that explains how Hitler found all his followers. They had abandoned their own mode of being, it made them bitter and resentful, and empty and hollow, and weak and cruel. And then they trained their leader to tell them what they wanted to hear.If you’re honest, which is painful, you see that a lot of the things that you say aren’t real. You’ll see that a lot of the things that you do make you weak. You’ll see that a lot of the people that you associate with are probably not good for you. And then you have a lot of difficult choices to make.You can stop with the obvious lying. That’ll clear things up for you a lot. And you can start communicating with people. One of the things I teach my clients is if you’re resentful say something about it. Say something about it. You tell the person ‘Look, what you asked me to do is making me feel resentful.’ Now, if they’re your wife or husband or someone you love, you should listen to them because they might say ‘Well, grow up. Take your damn responsibility and leave me alone.’ And maybe they’re right. Or maybe they’re a bit of a bully and you have to say ‘Quit pushing me around.’ Maybe you have to have an argument with them. An honest argument where you say ‘Look, this is what’s happening to me’ and they say ‘Look, this is what’s happening to me.’ And you battle it out until you reach some sort of settlement and then you don’t have to be resentful anymore. Then you won’t be mean and cruel and vicious. And you have to be honest in order to do that.Here’s a way of thinking about error. You don’t exactly know what you’re doing, so how do you get to the point where you know what you’re doing? I think follow your internal intuitions and be honest about it. What’ll happen is a star will appear and guide you. And the star is whatever makes your life meaningful. And maybe you’ll take some tentative steps in that direction and you’ll get a little ways and you’ll think ‘No, that’s wrong.’ And then the thing that makes your life meaningful will appear over there. And then you take a few tentative steps in that direction. But as you step and walk towards these things you change and as you change you get wiser. And what happens is, you keep following these things that make your life meaningful, then you correct yourself across time.You see the thing there and that’s wrong and you see it there and that’s wrong and you see it there and that’s wrong but you keep chasing it and as you chase it you move forward. And as you move forward and as you do things you learn from your mistakes because you’re honest and you’re watching. You get wiser and wiser and the consequence of all those mistakes is you’ll self-correct the mistakes and twenty years down the road maybe you won’t be making so many mistakes.They say it takes 10,000 hours to be an expert at something. So you would need 10,000 hours of practice following what it is you need to follow.I’m going to close with two things. I’ve come to the conclusion, as a consequence of studying the things I’ve been telling you about, that belief has a religious substructure. If you go all the way down into someone’s belief structure, right to the bottom, what you find are religious presuppositions. The person might not agree, but I don’t think that matters. I think generally people don’t know.Here’s an old religious presupposition, older than Christianity, though I suppose Christianity is the most powerful proponent of this viewpoint. There’s a heaven and there’s a hell and you should live your life so that you end up in one of them. What’s happened to Christianity is that that’s an afterlife thing. I don’t think it is an afterlife thing. I think it’s a now thing. I see people who are in hell all the time. And you can see them if you walk down Bloor St. I’m not kidding, it’s no joke.  If you walk by someone in hell, you can’t look at them. You won’t look at them, you’ll give them a wide berth. And if you look at them and you really look at them, they’ll either become aggressive or ashamed because they do not want you to see where they are because they don’t want to see where they are.And by the same token, heaven’s a real place too and now and then and you don’t notice because you don’t believe in it.There’s an old gospel, a gnostic gospel, that was dug up in 1957 – the Gospel of Thomas. And in the Gospel of Thomas Christ says ‘The kingdom of heaven is spread out on the earth but men do not see it.’ And I don’t think that’s a metaphor (or maybe it is a metaphor, it’s a deep metaphor). It means that life, human life, is very expansive and we live in the middle. It’s kind of a mediocre middle often. And at one extreme there’s hell and the other extreme is heaven and we bounce back and forth between them without really noticing.And I could say, well here’s something to consider: If the things that you’re doing are landing you in hell, stop! Unless you want to be there. And you know if you think, all you have to do is think about your life over the last year. You can be certain that you can call to mind times when you would have rather’d that did not happen. And so the lesson from that is clear: don’t set up those conditions anymore. And by the same token, if you watch yourself you can tell when you’re where you want to be and I could say, well, if you’re where you want to be then that’s really the right place and all you should ever do is practice to be there.The kingdom of heaven is spread out on the earth but men do not see it.So this is what I would say about virtue. Virtue first, is the attempt to see that heaven. And it’s a questioning thing. And I’m not saying that it’s the same for everyone. I don’t believe that all because people are individuals. Just to see it.And the second thing is to attempt to live in it. And I truly believe, I truly believe, that there is nothing that you can do that’s better for being (not only for yourself but for everyone that you interact with). None of you know your potential. People are amazing creatures.You know that people can be abysmally awful. But they can be as remarkably good as they are abysmally awful. I think it’s rare, but it’s not beyond the realm of possibility. What’s a human possibility? Well no one knows. Maybe it’s near infinite. We know nothing about our own being or our relationship with the totality of things.  We may occupy a more important place than we all think. And the consequences of our actions, our virtues or our lack thereof, echo, may echo, far beyond what we want to believe.So I would say try to find out what’s good for you. Just watch. Don’t listen to anybody else. Or maybe you should. Maybe they’ll give you some hints, you know. But you’ve got to sort it out for yourself. And when you find out what’s good for you and what isn’t, do the things that are good for you. Until you like being alive, until you’re thrilled to be alive. See what happens.And I would also suggest there’s nothing you could possibly do that will be more profound and useful than that.That’s all.So people are possessed by a question and it’s part of our nature to be possessed by this question and so you can think about this as a an archetypal question if you like and the question is “what are we doing here?” And you can ask yourself that in relationship to this conference, you are here to search for meaning and to understand what that might mean. But you also might ask yourself “well, why is it that you have to be here for your search for meaning? Why is that something that drive human beings?” It isn’t something that is characteristic of animals they don’t seem to question their existence. So, there’s something about the very nature of human being that makes us feel as if something needs to be set right. When that has been discussed historically it’s been associated with the term redemption. People are in need of redemption. In the modern age we talk about positive psychology and we talk about happiness, which is a much weaker word. But our forefathers had a more profound sense of the problematic state of human existence and they used more profound words. The idea that we have a need for redemption is a more profound idea. Human beings, and I am going to talk mostly about human beings in the West because that’s the literature I am most familiar with, human beings in the West have been meditating on the nature of human being for thousands of years. Perhaps, ever since we became self conscious, which is another thing that distinguishes us from animals and another thing that drives our search for meaning. The consequence of this meditation or one of the consequences of this meditation has been the production of a series of books that people know as the Bible. I realized years ago that people saw the world through the lenses of belief and more recently it’s been demonstrated that that’s actually inevitable because you’re a limited, cognitive processor. You have to frame your perceptions with beliefs. What I learned is that the belief systems people use to frame their perceptions have a structure and that structure is religious. A religious presupposition is one that you may not even notice that you make. It’s a predicate, or an axiom, or an assumption and the study of those axiomatic assumptions is what religion is about. Now, one of your axiomatic assumptions, for example, is that life involves a search for meaning and that’s associated with the idea of redemption. And you’ll notice that you ask that question because of course you‘re here, but you might not notice how strange it is that all of you ask that question. And the fact that all of you ask that question that human beings have asked that question as far back as we can understand is indicative of something profound about human nature – its lack of completion. Now, I’m going to walk you through the series of stories that make up this library of books known as the Bible because it presents a theory of redemption that in a sense is emergent, it’s a consequence of this insanely complicated, cross-generational meditation on the nature of being. It’s not designed by any one person. It’s designed by processes we don’t really understand because we don’t know anything about how books are written over thousands of years or what forces cause them to be compiled in a certain way or what narative direction they tend to take. Now, one of the things that is strange about the Bible, given that it’s a collection of books, is that it actually has a narrative structure. It has a story and that story has been cobbled together. It’s like it has emerged out of the depths. It’s not a top-down story, it’s a bottom-up story. And I suppose that’s why many of the world’s major religions regard the Bible as a book that was revealed, rather than one that was written. It’s a perfectly reasonable presupposition that it’s revealed because it’s not the consequence of any one author. It’s not written according to a plan or not a plan that we can understand, but nonetheless it has a structure. It also has a strange structure, in that it’s full of stories that no one can forget, but also that no one can understand and the combination of incomprehensible and unforgettable is a very strange combination. And of course that combination is basically mythological. So I am going to start out by telling you what Genesis says about why it is you need search for meaning. Now, people are pretty familiar as a general rule with the basic stories in Genesis. Genesis, starts out with “the Word of God” creating being from chaos. That’s a very complicated idea, the idea is whatever “the Word” is logos from a Christian perspective, from a Western perspective, logos is something like consciousness and something like speech has the power to pull order out of an underlying chaos. Now, we do this all the time. People do this all the time, that’s why, I suppose, we are hypothetically made in the image of God. We use our consciousness to construct meaning out of chaos and according to the opening of Genesis there is something about that that is akin to the construction of the world. So, that means from the perspective of this book, consciousness itself plays a world constructing role; it’s got a central place and human being in some ways participate in that in some minor sense I suppose, but in a sense that nonetheless makes them akin to what the library of books called the Bible assumes is deity. Now, once God, logos, extracts order out of chaos, he builds a little world and he populates it and in the little world he puts a garden, a walled garden (that’s paradise because paradise means walled garden or Eden, then Eden means well-watered place). And you might think, “Well, why a garden?” And the answer to that is a garden is the ultimate combination of nature and culture or chaos and order. Because a garden is where nature flourishes, but it’s also where nature flourishes in a safe and controlled environment. That’s like an optimal environment for people. So, there is a garden and God puts the people in there and that’s optimal. Then he warns them he says, this is a strange thing, he says “Now, you are in the garden. That’s where you should live and there is something you shouldn’t do. And what you shouldn’t do is eat a particular fruit. Now, I’m going to tell you something about vision. Human beings have excellent vision. First of all, we see color, hardly any creatures see color, but we do. And not only do we see color, but our vision is tremendously acute. The only other animal that can see as well as us our birds of prey. For mammals we can see like you wouldn’t believe and for primates as well, as we can see much better than our closest primate relatives. And why that is is a bit of a mystery and there is a woman in California that seems to perhaps have solved that, her name is Lynn Isabel and she is very interested in how humans developed vision and she is interested in patterns of predation (predator-prey relationships). And she knew that our tree-dwelling ancestors, millions of years ago, were frequently preyed upon by snakes. In fact, there is some evidence that our tree-dwelling ancestors and snakes coevolved and that our visual system is particularly good at picking up the patterns of camouflage that snakes use to hide in trees or in the undergrowth. And what Isabel showed was that if you looked at primate populations around the world, where there were more predatory snakes existed the primates could see better. It’s a very high correlation. So, she concluded that the reason that human beings could see so well was because of snakes. Now she thought that the association between that and the snake story in Genesis was  interestingly coincidental, but it’s much more than that. And we don’t know how the Adam and Eve story came about. We know it’s very ancient, but there’s something about it that sticks in our memory and in our culture and the reason for that seems to be that in some strange way it’s an extremely accurate summation. Snakes gave us vision. What about fruit? Well, the reason we can see colors is that our visual system can detect ripe fruit. What about women? Well, you have to be pretty awake to outsmart a woman. So, there’s this weird interconnection in Genesis between women, fruit, and snakes and the idea is that the interplay between the three (now remember that women were gatherers too or were gatherers historically speaking and they shared food with men and that is a strange thing eh? Because human being share food and  hardly any other animals do) and so women did tempt men with fruit and they did make themselves conscious along with the snake and the fruit and that was a catastrophe. What happens in Genesis is that people become self-conscious when they eat the fruit, their vision improves, the scales fall from their eyes, they can see in a way that no animal has ever seen. And one of the things that they can see is that they are naked and that that’s a big problem. And you might ask, “well what does being naked mean?” And that’s quite straightforward, people often dream, for example, of being naked in front of a crowd, and to be naked in front of a crowd is to have all your frailties and vulnerabilities revealed to judgment and that’s a nightmare for people. And so, to become self aware is to wake up into a nightmare and the nightmare involves the profound realization of individual vulnerability. And the consequence of that in Genesis is that people are banished from paradise and are from then on are in need of redemption and that they have to work and that’s how man comes to be in a fallen state. And you don’t have a need for redemption, or a need for meaning, or quest for meaning, unless you are in a fallen state. And everyone, strangely enough, has this intuition that they are in a fallen state, that something is wrong with the world that needs to be put right and more than that or something is wrong with being that needs to be put right and more than that that in some weird sense, in some weird way, they have a moral obligation to participate in that process. And that drives us, like it’s beneath what drives us. It’s an axiomatic presupposition. The next thing that happens in Genesis is that Abel and Cain are born and they’re really the first two human beings because Adam and Eve are made by God while Cain and Abel are born – they are the first people that are born in history. And interestingly enough, what happens between Cain and Abel, which is jealous resentment against God followed by murder is the first pattern of behavior that human beings manifest once they become self conscious. That’s an awful story! It’s a prototypical story in a sense because what it says is that there are two patterns of reaction toward tragic self consciousness. And one is associated with the state of murderous resentment, resentment toward life. The kind of murderous resentment that drove the killer at Colorado for example – murderous resentment against life. And the other typified by Abel, has something to do with the antithesis of murderous resentment, so you can associate murderous resentment in a sense with hell and you can associate Abel’s path, his choices with heaven. So, what happens is people become self conscious being divides into domain, that has hell on one end and heaven on another. And that’s only hinted at in the second story in Genesis. After that everything dissolves into a flood. That’s Noah. Into a flood nature comes in a tears everything down. And the tower of Babel is erected and that’s a meditation on pride. People build a structure that reaches up to where God is, it’s a presumptuous act and there’s reason for that too. One of the consistent warnings that emerges in the biblical text is warnings about the sin of pride and the sin of pride is an intellectual sin and it’s associated with the presupposition that you know enough to do without the transcendent. And the biblical stories state very very clearly, continually, that that is catastrophically dangerous. That you always have to be aware that there’s something transcendent that supersedes the domain of your knowledge. And what might you think of people that don’t believe that? Well, they’re totalitarians because they believe that their belief is total. And we know what happens when people become totalitarian. What happens is you get an instant creation of something on earth that very closely resembles hell. And that was hammered home in the twentieth century. If you want to derive one lesson from the twentieth century it’s that totalitarian states and totalitarian ideologies are not a good way to entrap or search after meaning. That’s a mistake. After the flood (before the flood – that’s prehistory – that’s so far back that we can’t even imagine it) after the flood there is a new beginning in sense. That’s when history really starts from a history perspective. The way the Old Testament lays itself out then is that it’s kind of a classic hero myth. A hero myth that concerns itself with the establishment of states. And generally speaking when societies mythologize the beginnings of their state they imagine a set of heroes. It’s sort of happening with George Washington in the United States, this happens automatically, that the founders of the state are mythologized as the great heroes of the past. It’s the great heroes of the past, our forefathers, who established the state. And of course that’s true and there were millions of them, but you can’t tell a story about millions of people so all the actions of those millions of people are collapsed and condensed and compressed and turned into a kind of fiction that is more real than truth, that describes the patterns the describe how the state was founded. And the Old Testament runs us through that. The heroes, like Abraham for example and Jacob, who are crucially involved in the establishment of the polity of the actual state. But something always happens as this state is established. What happens is the state’s established and then people get off course and the leadership gets off course and then the state collapses into a state of chaos and then there is a prophetic revelation warning of that danger and then there is a terrible period of chaotic disruption and then there is the regeneration of the state. That story is foreshadowed in the Old Testament by Exodus, Moses’ story: Egypt’s a tyranny, a leader rises to pull everyone out of tyranny, there is a terrible chaotic interlude – the wandering in the desert, and then there is the reestablishment of the state. That’s an archetypal pattern. That happens to all of you. It happens to every country. The pattern is you’re in your system of belief, which is yours and a collective of belief, and something arises like a snake, analogous to a snake, to disrupt it because the state is insufficiently adapted to the environment. It doesn’t have all the answers. It ages and become corrupt and then it’s prone to collapse and that collapse is a catastrophe, a chaotic catastrophe. That happens to you every time, for example, that your dreams are shattered or that you encounter a great tragedy. It happens to people when their spouse dies or when they’re diagnosed with a very dangerous illness or when their children are damaged. That event, analogous as I said to a snake and that’s partly because the circuits in your brain that detect snakes that other animals use to detect snakes are the same circuits that we use to detect things that go wrong. And things are always going wrong for us. And we’re always collapsing into a state where we are wandering through a desert and a desert is a state that is bereft of meaning and bereft of ideas. And in that state then we are desperately seeking for, well, for the establishment of another state. A state that we hope will be a better state. It will be like the last state, except there will more to it and people will finally be happy. That’s part of our utopian dream. And it’s impossible not to be in that story. You’re either in a state of order or you’re in a state of chaos. And that’s why the Daoists for example believe that the world is made of order and chaos, because you are always in one of those two place. What happens in the Old Testament is that the limitations of the state itself start to become apparent and they become apparent in that the state is established but it always collapses, then it’s reestablished, but it always collapses – it’s never permanent. And there’s repetitions of this, continual repetitions of this. REVIEW 20:27 An upshot of the Old Testament or at least the way it has been constructed in Christianity is that the state itself is flawed, it cannot provide the final answer to the question “what constitutes genuine redemption?” Well this is an important issue, it’s an important issue psychologically, it’s an important issue politically, “is the state the final answer?” Well, it’s a totalitarian claim, we know that is is a claim that was claimed by people like Stalin. It was certainly claimed by the communists. It was claimed by people like Hitler that the state was the final answer. It’s still claimed in many ways by places like China today. The individual is subsumed under the state organization and the state, well, under Stalin the state was already in a state of perfection if you complained about its imperfection you were going to be killed. So, the idea that the state is perfect, while it’s a tremendously flawed idea, can be pursued so hard by people that are gripping their narrow viewpoints that the state itself becomes murderous. The Old Testament sort of sums itself up in the book of Job. It’s a problematic summing up because Job is tormented in all sorts of ways. Everything that could possibly be terrible that happens to any person happens to Job. He can’t understand why. So, Job is in like a final state of unredeemed being. The state’s not the answer. So then if being is order and being is chaos and chaos is untolerable and the state order is not the answer, what do you have left? That’s the question the New Testament attempts to solve. One of the problems with the Soviet Union, for example, was their inability to correct errors. See when you start out with an a priori hypothesis about what constitutes the truth and that structures your life, it’s very difficult to make the micro corrections that a state has to make on a continual basis in order to remain dynamic and fluid. So, in order to stay adapted to reality, not only do you have to have a viewpoint but you have to engage in the process of modifying that viewpoint. And the way that you engage with the process of modifying that viewpoint, there’s two ways really, one is continual minor adjustments as a consequence of paying attention. So, for example, if you are having a conversation with your wife or a friend, a difficult conversation, there’s a couple of ways that conversation can go. One is you can take your viewpoint and impose it upon that person. And often when people are talking that’s what they are trying to do. They’re not having a conversation. What they are doing is they are trying to impose a viewpoint they already hold dear on the person that is listening. And if they’re a tyrant or a bully they will do that and pay no attention whatsoever to the person’s response and in fact they will get irritated or violent if the person does not accept their a priori framing. Is there an alternative? Well there is an alternative. The alternative is to pay attention and to listen on the off chance that the person you are talking to might tell you something you don’t know. But in order to listen you must be already convinced that the little theory you are using to orient yourself in the world isn’t good enough, because if it was good enough why would you bother listening. So, you have to be deeply aware of your own ignorance and that’s what humility means. Humility means to be deeply aware of your own ignorance. It doesn’t mean to slink around in an ashamed manner. It means to make the presupposition that you many have something left to learn and that this annoying person in front of you might have something to teach you if you would just listen. And so, you’re discussing a problem, and a problem is a time when the things you think aren’t working, that’s what constitutes a problem. So, you have a little problem and let’s say you are discussing it with your wife and she offers you her opinion. And you can brush it off and which case your little state stays in tact, it doesn’t move, it’s still made of stone, it’s pillars and you’re still a tyrant or you can listen and you can think “oh I see, there is a microcorrection that I need to make in one of the peripheral elements of my belief.” And that’s a little painful because it means you have to let something go, your presumption, and then you have to be a little chaotic as you adjust to the new information and then you have to reconstitute yourself. And what that means, interestingly enough, is that you have to make a sacrifice. And God likes sacrifices, especially if they are of the proper kind. And the proper sacrifice is the one you make of your microbelief when you are faced with evidence of error. And if you make those types of microsacrifices, then God stays pleased with you. And the reason for that is that your models of the world stay up to date.Now, one of the things that happens in the Old Testament all the time is that people are making sacrifices to God and modern people they have no idea, “why does god want burnt lamb smoke?” It’s not obvious to modern people, but your ancestors weren’t stupid. They were dramatizing something. They were dramatizing this tremendous realization that no other creature has ever managed that is that there are things that you can do to your being that change the nature of reality. And if you do them properly you can make reality better. It’s mind boggling and they acted that out because they didn’t really understand it. They noticed that if things weren’t going right you had to sacrifice something valuable and that seemed to make God happy. Well, it might have been a first-born calf of a first-born son for that matter. For modern people it’s more like an idea. You have to sacrifice an idea that you hold dear in order to progress, because the ideas that you hold dear are exactly what are you making you suffer if you are suffering. So you have to sacrifice them and then you have to let them go and the consequence of that is that you enter into this little period of chaos and then maybe you pop out of that and that is a good thing. And so, here is an interesting observation: that process of being in a state and identifying an error and correcting it, that is a little death and rebirth. That’s like the phoenix. The phoenix dissolves itself into ashes then pops back up as a new bird. In the New Testament there is this weird idea that you have to identify with a person who continually dies and is reborn. Well, what does that mean? It means that the idea that redemption itself is not the consequence of being in a state. It’s the consequence of participating in a process and the process is the willingness to continually have yourself sacrificed, chaotic, and then reborn. And that’s what keeps things alive. Now, in the passion story there are other elements and the elements are important. So, for example, the story of Christ is predicated on the assumption that the person who is making the ultimate sacrifices performs a number of acts or undergoes a number of processes and one is a disciplined apprenticeship. So, for example, in order to have some ideas that you can let go and reconstitute you have to have some ideas. You can’t just be all chaotic and unformed and so in the New Testament Christ is a master of tradition – He is a master of the law. And you have to be disciplined. You have to be a master of something before you are formed at all. You have to be imbued with the spirit of your ancestors, we’ll say. You have to take on that burden. You see this reflected in popular culture, for example, in the movie Pinocchio. At the end of the movie, when Pinocchio is about to become a real boy, his last challenge is to rescue his father. And he does that, and to rescue the father means to make peace with your culture and to embody it, but then not to assume that is absolute. It’s a necessary process of discipline. The next idea that underlies the passion narrative in the New Testament is that the ultimate sacrifice is the sacrifice of yourself to God. Now, that’s a very strange idea, a very very sophisticated idea because what happens is in the Old Testament there’s the constant sacrificing of something else. This requires a different order of being. What does it mean to offer yourself up as a sacrifice to God? Well, you can think of God as an ineffable representation of the highest possible value. That’s what monotheists presume. The don’t really presume that God is nameable. Even the Israelites presumed that God wasn’t nameable – it’s ineffable, but it’s the ultimate value whatever the ultimate value is. You don’t know what it is but you kind of have some idea. And the idea of offering yourself up as a sacrifice to God is determining that your life will be guided by unshakeable commitment to the highest good. And what that means is that it is no longer your state that is in charge, it’s no longer your ego that is in charge, it’s not even you that’s in charge. It means that your conversations with people are no longer going to be about convincing them that your viewpoint is right. It means that what your conversation is going to be about and your speech is going to be about attempting to represent what you believe to be true in the most concise and clear possible manner, no matter what. And that’s not how people live. People live in a sense by…it’s like a conniving. And the conniving is a totalitarian conniving. Conniving is an idea that the world should be the way that I want it to be. “I have a theory about how I want the world to be and I will enforce that theory. And I am going to be very angry if the world does not respond the way I want it to be and maybe I will be violent as a consequence of it. And I have some sense of where I am headed. Maybe I am headed for wealth, for example. And I am headed for an advertisement, so I am headed with my wife when I’m 50 on a tropical beach and that’s how I am going to be redeemed.” It’s a narrow and totalitarian viewpoint and then I sacrifice everything to that and it turns out that that’s a very bad idea, because things don’t turn out the way that I want them to turn out. And the alternative to that, and this is one of the things that happens in the Sermon on the Mount, it’s a very strange document, because it represents a transformation from the idea that morality is constituted by adherence to a set of rules to morality being aimed at something you might think about as more of a positive good. It’s not merely not doing what’s wrong, it’s something else. It’s sacrificing yourself in the attempt to make things better. And making things better, not by aiming at what’s better but by telling what’s true and assuming that if you do that then what’s better will happen, whatever that is because you don’t know what is better. You don’t have the capacity to fully realize what would constitute better. I mean we have seen that over and over and over in the twentieth century. People aim at a circumscribed definition of what constitutes the utopian state and all we get out of that is endless hell. We have to pursue what is good, but we don’t know what good is. So, how do we remove ourselves from that paradox? Well, it isn’t a matter of gathering more knowledge, it’s a matter of approaching reality in a different manner and it is an act of faith as Kierkegaard pointed out. Because if you decide, for example, that you are going to pursue the highest good whatever that is (pursuing the highest good means being willing to transform what your conception of the highest good is). You pursue the highest good. That’s your aim. Your aim determines the world that you live in. We know that. That’s a fact. That’s a psychological fact. What you aim at determines the nature of your world. And to aim wrong – hamartia, that’s a Greek word – to aim wrong that’s sin, because hamartia which is an archery term which means to miss the target is what sin means. So, if you’re not in a state of grace it means that your aim’s wrong. You are not aiming at the right thing or maybe the world is constituted badly and it’s hellbent on torturing you. That’s that alternative viewpoint. You got to get your aim right. You aim at the best. And how do you aim? Well, the Sermon on the Mount says something very interesting it says, “once you get your aim right and you decide to tell the truth, then all you have to do is concentrate on the day.” Now, people read the Sermon on the Mount like it is a hippy document. You know “Be like a flower. Be like a bird. Don’t pay any attention to the future.” You know, “everything will be taken care of.” It’s not that at all! There’s presumptions that are nested in there and the presumption is, first of all, that you are aiming at a perfection. You are aiming at whatever perfection is. And you are not trying to get other people to do that. You are aiming at it. You are reconstituting your actions and your speech to aim at that. And then you do that by noticing very carefully and attending to what constitutes the truth. And then you let that take you to wherever it will go. And that constitutes the sacrifice of self to God. Because the truth is a representation of whatever constitutes reality. Your best attempt at whatever constitutes reality. And to follow that means to follow something that’s transcendent, because whatever reality is it’s certainly not something that you are individually responsible for creating even though you might participate in that process. To speak the truth is to be guided by being. That’s a completely different mode of being. Now, I said right after Adam and Eve’s catastrophic emergence into self consciousness the world split into two attitudes, one associated with Cain and the other with Abel and that those attitudes are associated with heaven and hell. Well, we know that human beings can turn the world into hell. If you’re a student of history you have no doubt about that. And no matter how terrible you think the hell that people have created in the past is, if you read a little more history, you’ll find something even more terrible. And people, of course, are afraid of the human capacity to turn things into hell. That’s one of the things that underlies our environmentalism, we’re afraid that our misbehavior will turn the world into hell. Well, we believe we can do that. Do we believe that human beings can turn the world into heaven? Well, that’s a harder thing to believe, eh? Because there are a lot more ways that things can go wrong than there are ways that things can go right. So heaven’s a much narrower thing to aim at than hell which is a chaotic mess. Well, maybe it’s improbable, but life is improbable that’s for sure and our unredeemed state of being is improbable and the other thing that’s improbable is the burden that we are required to carry existentially. We’re awake creatures of God. What does that mean? It means that we suffer and it’s real that suffering. It’s not only that we suffer in that we feel pain, which is bad enough and frustration and disappointment and all the catastrophic things that are associated with life, but even worse we can apprehend the possibility of that recurring in the future. So even when those terrible things happen to be happening right now it’s pretty easy to imagine that they’re going to happen tomorrow and they will. So not only can we imagine they are going to happen they are going to happen tomorrow, they are going to happen again tomorrow. So, we are in a state of constant unredeemed suffering. It’s a big problem. And you know, you think about it and you can’t even imagine a state that would address that. It’s just too big of a problem. Well, so there is another inference in the New Testament and its hypothesis of a metastate and the inference is that: a life that’s predicated on a constant death and renewal at every level of being, a life that’s predicated on a search for the truth and an attempt to act out the truth, and a life associated with the sacrifice of self to God produces a state of being that’s so deeply meaningful that it justifies suffering. It doesn’t eliminate suffering. There’s no elimination of suffering. Nietzsche said, “He who has a why can bear any how.” And what he meant by that was “if what you’re aiming at is of sufficient profundity, it’s worth an awful lot of misery to participate in the process of bringing it about.” And life has an unbearable depth of misery and as a consequence it needs an absurd positive aim. And the absurd positive aim is posited in the New Testament is participation in a process that transforms earth into heaven – the generation of the Kingdom of God on earth. And that actually means something. It means that the state of being that’s described by the parameters that I already laid out, the willingness to engage in eternal sacrificial death and renewal and sacrifice of the self to the highest value produces a state of being, subjectively, that’s associated with habitation in the kingdom of God. And the actions that are conducted in that state are what transform the interpersonal state into the political state that’s a manifestation of that kingdom. Now, you all know this! You know this the same way that the people in the Bible know it, because, of course, people just like you wrote the Bible and the Bible is about people. When you have a deeply meaningful conversation with someone, you change them and you change yourself. You know that. And the process that you are engaged in while you have that deeply meaningful conversation, that’s a mode of being. And that mode of being, to the degree that mode of being is predicated on the attempt to communicate as truthfully as possible and with the highest possible end in mind then right then and there you’re in that state. Now you can tell when you are in that state because: number 1, you are not self conscious, time disappears. Number 2, what you are engaged in is deeply meaningful. You don’t bare the tragic burden of your life at that moment because what’s happening with you is so worthwhile that it consumes you completely. And people are in that state to a wildly varying degree, but everyone is in it sometimes. When something like that happens to you, especially when you learn to notice it you think, “Well there’s nothing better than that.” And if there’s nothing better than that, then you might ask yourself, “Why do anything else?” Now, I have tried to figure that out. I have tried to figure that out for years because, to me, these look like existential realities. They are not hypothetical states. They’re not shoved off into some transcendent heaven. They’re not otherworldly. They’re part of being itself. People can enter states of heaven and hell and they can learn to stay longer in one state or another. So, why don’t they stay in the best possible state? Well, one problem is the commitment of faith I think. It’s very terrifying to let go of the direction of your life and say, “Well I am going to go wherever the attempt to speak the truth will take me.” Because God only knows where you are going to end up and it’s certainly not where you think. In fact, the willingness to abandon going to where you think is a prerequisite for doing this. So, in a sense, you’re a ship that the wind takes wherever it wants to take. And the second problem I think is that it is a real responsibility, because in order to undertake this process you have to come to terms with the idea that what you do in your life, your wretched miserable tragic-prone life, actually matters. Really it matters. You know, and people complain about meaninglessness in their life all the time, but I think that’s a kind of face-saving illusion. I think people are more afraid of meaning than they are of meaninglessness, because meaninglessness means “Well, I can do whatever I want and it can be kind of second-rate, might be dull, it might be dangerous, it might be destructive, but it doesn’t matter. So, I can do whatever I want. I have no responsibility because I don’t mean anything. So, I am not responsible to anything or anyone.” But if your life actually has meaning and it doesn’t always have meaning, it has meaning when you are doing something meaningful, well then all of the sudden you are responsible to a higher power so to speak, you are responsible to your own soul, and your responsible to the state of being that characterizes the world itself. And that is a massive, massive responsibility. It’s to take responsibility, in a sense, it’s to take responsibility for the sins of the world, which is another prerequisite for the mode of being that is described in the New Testament. It’s a very strange idea that the Redeemer takes on the sins of the world. What does that mean? Well, it means all human beings are Nazis and human beings are the Maoist Red Guard and human beings are the slaughterers in Rwanda. And you’re all human beings. And so to take on the sins of the world means all those things that characterize the human capacity to turn earth into hell characterize you and in order to live properly you have to live in a manner that addresses those elements of your nature. And again that’s a terrible responsibility. Well, first of all, who wants to admit that? Second of all, who can stand looking at it? And third, who’s going to take on the burden of solving it? Well, it better be all of us or we’re just going to keep doing it. So, redemption, what does it mean? It means that we’re not in a state of grace. Why? We’re self conscious, we’re aware of the tragedy of our being, we’re unwilling to take responsibility for it, or we’re ignorant about how to do that and that leaves us bereft. How do we solve that? Well, we can solve it with a state, but the problem is that the state is not reliable. It degenerates into tyranny. Then it transforms into chaos, then it reconstitures into chaos and does the same thing again. It’s not a good answer. Is there another answer? Well, maybe. I believe that what is outlined in narrative form in the New Testament is psychologically correct. I believe that the idea that endless microdeath and renewal produces a state of proper adaptation to being. And that the prerequisites for that, that are laid out in the narrative structure that underlies the New Testament, are fundamentally correct. So to be redeemed is to aim at the highest value, to sacrifice what’s no longer useful and valid in yourself, and to tell the truth. The consequence of that is existence in a deep state of meaning that justifies the tragedy of being and the possibility of transforming your own life in the most beneficial positive direction while simultaneously doing that for the people around you. And that’s redemption.3:00  Ok. I started studying the things that I have been talking about, in, well, really as long back as I can remember, I think that’s true.  I wrote an essay when I was about thirteen. On the, on Auschwitz. It wasn’t a very good essay, I was only thirteen. so it’s not that surprising. And I don’t why exactly it was a particular concern to me , except that, of course, it’s the sort of thing that should be of concern to everyone. (Audience member speaks)  How about if I speak a littler louder? Alright! Nah, I’ll do it, I’ll do it this way.4:00  I think. If you have any trouble at the back, let me know, and I’ll make sure that I’m projecting. So, I said when I was about thirteen, I wrote an essay on Auschwitz, and I was trying to understand it. I think maybe I tried to understand it in a way that was somewhat different than most people who examine historical events because I was trying to understand how human beings could do that knowing full well that I was one of them. And that’s the critical thing. Because generally when people examine, especially something horrifying that’s done by humanity, they make the assumption that its other people doing it and that’s a, that’s a big mistake in my estimation. Because if a lot of human beings have done something terrible. You can be sure that5:00  being a human being that you’re capable of it. And you know one of the things we’ve been asked repeatedly to do as a consequence of what happened in World War Two, is to not forget it. But, it’s always been my contention that you can’t remember something you don’t understand. And you don’t understand what happened in Nazi Germany or in the Soviet Union for that matter, until you understand that had you been there, the probability that you would have played a role and that it wouldn’t have been a positive one is extraordinarily high. When people do think about themselves as actors in situations like that, they have a proclivity to cast themselves in the heroic role assuming that had they been, say in Nazi Germany in the nineteen thirties that they would have taken on the burden of6:00 fighting against the Nazis and defending the things that should’ve been defended. But that’s a very foolish presupposition especially because it’s more or less self-evident from the historical perspective that that isn’t what people did. And in order for us to come to terms with that , it means that, we have to understand how it happened but more importantly what role we still play as individuals in acting in such a way that such things are not only likely but desired!  When I was older at, in university, I was plagued by nightmares mostly about , they were apocalyptic nightmares mostly about the third world war and I had a eerie large, long series of dreams about7:00 about nuclear bombs. I remember one of them. I was living in Edmonton on the time, on the south side. And I can remember watching out through my window in the dream and seeing a mushroom cloud forming over the main core of the city. And then the dream shifted locales. There were a bunch of people in the wreckage and they started to fight, and I thought that’s just exactly right. That was what my nightmares were like. No matter how tremendous the catastrophe, we don’t seem to derive the proper conclusion from it and start to act in way that makes such things less rather than more likely. When I was in graduate school at McGill which would’ve been after that, I was studying political science8:00 before that sorry, back I was in Edmonton, before that I had even thought about going into law but as I studied political science, I got increasingly disenchanted with the explanations that had be offered to me about motivations for human conflict. Especially in the upper years of my undergraduate education the lower years were pretty good, I was mostly studying political philosophy and literature and I found that very helpful. But in the upper years, the contention of the professors was that people primarily engaged in conflict for economic reasons. That never struck me as a very deep, as a deep explanation , because it didn’t get at the core of the issue, which is well people fight about things of material value, by why do they value those things? I mean it’s kinda self-evident if you think about food and shelter and so forth but, you know generally speaking, the twentieth century, it wasn’t necessarily about9:00 basic food and shelter that people we engaging in conflict over, it was something much more subtle than that maybe it had more to do with national identity, with identity, that kind of thing. And so there was a psychological element missing in the analysis of the human propensity for conflict to me that loomed larger and larger so I decided at least, in part for that reason to pursue a graduate degree in psychology and then clinical psychology and I went to McGill and that’s when I started to read much more broadly I suppose. I spent a lot of time reading, I read a lot of Freud and a lot of all the classic clinical psychologists who are extraordinarily useful. Carl Rogers and Sigmund Freud and Alfred Adler, a whole host of them. All the classic thinkers I could get my hands on. And also, most particularly the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, most of whose10:00 major works I read at that point. Fyodor Dostoyevsky, who was writing very similar things to Nietzsche, in fact Nietzsche was quite influenced by Dostoyevsky. And Dostoyevsky was like a master in the literary genre, his five great books focused on the most difficult questions that faced humanity both socially and individually and I found those books overwhelmingly powerful and also extraordinarily useful. Crime and Punishment for example, is a brilliant, brilliant piece of work outlining the motivation of someone who regards himself as above all law. And decides that to on not kill when necessary is an act out of cowardice and so. Dostoyevsky walks through his rationalizations and the and the murder and the aftermath of it in a way that’s extraordinarily enlightening and painful simultaneously. And at the same time Nietzsche,11:00 in Germany, was writing philosophical tracks on exactly the same themes. Their lives ran in unbelievably close parallel. In fact when Nietzsche finally went insane he had some illness that’s been very difficult to diagnose. He had seen someone beating a horse in the street and embraced it out of compassion and there’s a scene exactly like that in one of Dostoyevsky’s stories! So the parallels are really uncanny. And I also read a lot of neuroscience because I did my thesis on the biological predisposition to alcoholism that required a lot of investigation more into hard core science investigation into the structure and function of the brain and I tried to weave all of that together in a book that I published in 1999. It took me about fifteen years to write, I was writing about three hours a day, every day. And thinking about it all the time, like I was absolutely, one hundred percent12:00 obsessed by these sorts of issues that I’m discussing with you today. That took me deep. I read Alexander Solzhenitsyn and then of course, I studied Carl Jung in great depth when I finally started to crack what he was talking about, it was extraordinarily difficult material. I read volume nine of his collected works which is called “Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious”. The first time I read it , I didn’t understand a word he was saying ! And I think that’s very common experience for people reading Jung, whose s certain persona non grata in the modern academy . I think the reason for that is, well I think when you first encounter Jung you tend to bounce off him then the next thing that happens is you get very frightened and then you leave it the hell alone and it’s no wonder, as far as I’m concerned because I don’t think I’ve ever read anyone including Nietzsche, that was more terrifying than13:00  Jung. Jung was student of Nietzsche, I don’t mean technically speaking. Although  Nietzsche was everywhere, Nietzsche’s thinking was everywhere when Jung was maturing.  People know Carl Jung primarily as a disciple let’s say of Freud, which was true in part of course because Freud did the initial, you might call, you might describe it, as excavating work outlining the fact that there was more going on in the human psyche then met the conscious eye. In his greatest work, likely was the The Interpretation of Dreams. Where he started to perform an archeology of the symbolic unconscious, showing that much of our mental life went on in some sense underneath our conscious awareness, which is of course regarded as a truism now by psychologists but was regarded as quite revolutionary at the time, it wasn’t Freud’s, it wasn’t  entirely an original idea with Freud.14:00  Few things are entirely original ideas. But he went farther than anyone else, synthesizing and also publicizing and promoting it and also basing his psychotherapeutic theory on it. Really remarkable set of accomplishments. Jung was very much influenced by Freud , but also by Nietzsche. The reasons his was influenced by Nietzsche, most particularly, was that Nietzsche’s announcement of the Death of God in the late nineteen hundreds was a very striking philosophical event and I’ll return to this, but Nietzsche believed that because God was dead so to speak, and the value structure upon which Western Civilization was constructed had God at its foundation. And that would all crumble and that people would have to become their own deities in a sense, they would have to discover to create , for Nietzsche, to create their own values. And before Nietzsche could outline how that might happen15:00 he suffered the unfortunate descent into madness and then died. And so he left this major problem behind, which is if it’s the case that the ideational foundation of Western Civilization was predicated on an illusion, on an illusion, what would we do next? And Nietzsche said well what we will certainly do next is descend into an unholy combination of nihilism and totalitarianism because those will be the things that will beckon most clearly in the chaotic aftermath of the dissolution of the value structure upon which our society had been predicated. Nietzsche in his book “Will to Power” prophesized very directly that millions of people would die in the 20th century specifically because of communist revolutions16:00 and that was forty years, roughly speaking, thirty to forty years before the communist revolution in the Soviet Union. So that’s an act of prophetic vision that’s absolutely incomprehensible! I mean in the West, we didn’t know that the Soviet Union was going to fall until the day it fell! And Nietzsche knew what was going to happen in the twentieth century in like eighteen eighty! It’s absolutely remarkable. Jung was very interested in the Nietzschean problem, more interested in it than anything else. Because he knew that the question of where we would derive our values from and how we would ground them in some sort of underlying solid underlying reality would become, was the paramount psychological question of the age. And he spent his entire life attempting to address that. Jung’s idea was that we weren’t going to be able to create our own values because human beings cannot create their own values. You know that17:00  if you observe your own action, if you observe your own being. You can make resolutions and try to act in particularly way. Maybe in way that you regard as better. But you’ll find out very rapidly that you can’t enslave yourself and tell yourself what to do so easily, even when you’re motivated to do good things, ya know? When you make new year’s resolutions, and say you’re going to eat properly and go to the gym, that generally lasts about a week! And so you can’t boss yourself around as it turns out no more than you can really boss other people around and it’s because you do have a nature. You have a nature. And you can’t just arbitrarily mold and shape that nature because you, like other people, will rebel against your own will and so. And so Jung’s contention was that we would have to go inside ourselves, that’s how he looked at it, into the into the symbolic background of our psychological structure and rediscover what we had lost. And so18:00 I found that’s the ancient mythological motif of voyaging to the depths and rescuing your father from the belly of the beast, you see that idea reflected often in popular culture. A very well developed example of that is in the movie Pinocchio. How many of you have seen that movie?  Yeah, right, well that speaks for itself right? Why, why , why are you watching a puppet? An animated puppet rescue his father from the belly of a whale? It makes absolutely no sense , but you don’t care when you’re watching it. You think this is quite interesting. The reason it’s interesting is because, it speaks to you on a level that you understand but that you do not understand how you understand. And of course, any good work of art does exactly that to you. Speaks to you about things that you almost know but don’t yet know, and that’s what19:00  makes it profound. And Jung knew that it would be necessary for modern people to journey to the chaotic depths and rescue their dead father from the underworld which is a very interesting symbolic realization in the aftermath of Nietzsche’s statement that God had died. And so that’s why Jung did, that’s what he spent his entire life doing and he detailed that in a very long series of very difficult and very unsettling books which people tend not to read and , and no wonder, no wonder. And so I read everything I could get my hands on that Jung had published up to that point and a lot of work by various historians of religion like Mircea Eliade, who’s out of favor because the postmodernists don’t like him. I put this all together in this book that I published in 1999 called Maps of Meaning, it’s a very difficult book and that was somewhat purposeful and somewhat20:00 inevitable. It was, it was purposeful because I knew that if I was going to discuss such things and I didn’t make it ridiculously rigorous at least to the degree that I was capable of doing that , that it would be easily dismissed and that seemed counterproductive but it was also because I was trying to figure out, rather than trying to write a book, I was trying to figure something out. And I was doing that by writing, because writing is a very good way of figuring things out and I was trying to make it as clear as I could, but that wasn’t all that clear. You know it’s about five hundred pages long, I think this book. And it’s and I think I rewrote every sentence in it at least fifty times. Probably too many times because in the end it got, I think I over-edited it. I think it was, it’s in some sense too tight! It’s like an overworked piece of art, that might be one way of thinking about it. But and then it’s taken me decades of speaking about it to continue to21:00 what would you call it, purify and refine it so I could discuss it without having to go through dozens of hours of explanation and to condense it down into something that’s more easily comprehensibl , so that’s what I’m going to try to do this afternoon. I wanna tell you why I think we’re in the position that we’re in, what that position is, and also potentially what can be done about it. Because also I believed and still do believe if you can actually understand a problem , you can solve it. But that’s actually an indication of your understanding, right? If you haven’t solved it, you actually don’t understand it. There’s things about it you still don’t grasp. And so when I was writing Maps of Meaning, I wasn’t so much trying to only figure out why it was that people were capable of the terribly barbaric things that they so happily did at Auschwitz but also to figure out what could be done? If anything to stop that from happening because it was also22:00  by no means self-evident that anything in fact could be done about it, ya know. Because that might just be an expression of that central human nature that I was talking about earlier and being fundamental irreparable. There’s been no shortage of writers who propose that human beings are fundamentally flawed and in a way that cannot be rectified and that you know our , we have a catastrophic destiny waiting for us as a consequence. I mean in some sense that’s built right into the fabric of Christianity itself, because of course , at least certain variants of it. And I’m speaking about Christianity because in many ways, it’s at the foundation of Western Society because certain elements of Christianity at least regard people as irretrievably or irreparably tainted with original sin which emerged right at the birth of our species . There’s something extraordinarily powerful about that idea. Because, of course, everybody in this room, knows they’re seriously flawed and also knows that they do things that make those flaws more rather than less likely and everyone23:00 has that sense about themselves unless they’re narcissistic beyond belief, in which case also suspect it, but only at an unconscious level. So ya know, we do carry this sense of ourselves as deeply flawed and imperfect and maybe fatally so that seems to be built right into us so maybe there is no solution , but that seemed like a dismal hypothesis to begin with . So I wanted to do, I wanted to investigate as deeply as I possibly could to see if I could conjure up something that vaguely represented a solution. For a long time, ya know, there were months when I was writing, where I really felt quite mad and one of the most intense periods of time where that occurred was kinda on the cusp of figuring out what I needed to figure out, I figured out two things:24:00 One was that I kinda understood finally why people had belief systems, and it wasn’t. The belief system was there because we have to deal with an infinitely complex world and we have to simplify it down to proportions that we can manage because we don’t have infinite cognitive or emotional or physiological resources, we are very bounded creatures living in an unbounded environment roughly speaking, it’s too much for us! And so we have to impose structures of simplification on the world or we get so stressed we die! That’s roughly the bottom line. For example if you develop Post Traumatic Stress Disorder which occurs when you encounter something in your life that you cannot compute, so to speak , your body goes into emergency preparation mode which makes it hyper, hyper responsive to threat and ready to do anything, which is emergency preparation and that’s so physiologically demanding it demolishes your health. It’s not merely psychological, it damages your brain.25:00 I mean, you just can’t stay in high gear, running flat out continually. You die. So people need to simplify the world, they need to live within structures of simplification because that’s how they protect themselves from the terrible onslaught of complexity, by the same token we organize ourselves into these structures of simplification, that’s what our cultures are, we negotiate them, we inhabit them jointly. And because of that we run into people who do that differently, the probability that we will engage in conflict is extraordinarily high, because I can’t give up my beliefs just because you have different beliefs, and if we don’t have the same beliefs then we can’t peacefully occupy the same territory, so there seems to be nothing for that except conflict , if we can’t negotiate that we have to fight. So then I thought, well that’s….that’s….that’s that then! Then on the one hand we can’t abandon our belief systems because they26:00 structure our realities and protect us but, and we can’t fight because now we’re so technologically powerful that if we do we’re gonna destroy everything it’s like well, that’s that! There’s that’s option one and its opposite that completely exhausts the options, and so that was a horrible realization, absolutely dreadful realization. Because you know, it’s certainly possible if you think about this from a biological or evolutionary viewpoint, is that we’re kind of a peculiar species and we’ve developed these terrible technologies of war there’s absolutely no reason to assume we won’t just use them to wipe ourselves out! And you know maybe thirty percent of us, as individuals in our own psyches, would be happy about that! Because life is pretty dreadful and it’s full of suffering and there are lots of things that are harsh about existence maybe we should just let the whole thing go. And believe me, people are plenty motivated to do that. If you haven’t observed that motivation in yourself at some point in your life either you’re not paying attention or don’t want to pay attention or something sufficiently dreadful27:00  has not yet happened to you, but it will! It will, because everyone encounters catastrophic crises in their life and it drops the bottom out of them and it makes them desperate and angry and that’s also part of the human condition. Luckily, after about three months of thinking about that I had a series of dreams that helped me sort out a third alternative and that was, at least in part, emerged as a consequence of all things that I was reading. So, I wanna return to the Nietzschean conundrum. So, Nietzsche was an extraordinarily astute critic of the Judeo-Christian tradition. He wrote a book called “The Anti-Christ”, in fact. 28:00 And he also said that he philosophized with a hammer. And what he meant by that was that he was taking the hardest, heaviest object he could and smashing up everything he possible could with as much intellectual rigor as he could manage and that was plenty because he was truly a genius. But he wasn’t a nihilistic person, quite the contrary, he had a very good reputation among those who knew him, for example as a very kind man. But he was in part looking for something he couldn’t destroy. Right, because that’s partly how you find out what’s real, you hit things, so to speak. You push against them, your children do that to you for example. They push against you to see where you won’t yield and then they think , ah there’s reality there, there’s a wall there, I can’t go beyond that . And that’s what Nietzsche was searching for and he was doing it all along fundamentally. His contention was that what had happened in the West was that the Judeo-Christian tradition and even the precursors of that tradition, from which that tradition29:00 emerged, had insisted for millennia, that the pursuit of truth was the highest moral value, and that one of the consequences of that was that the West developed science, which was part of that pursuit of the truth. And then the tools of science, once successfully grasped and universalized were then turned against the dogmatic structure of the church when everyone woke up as scientists, so to spoke, and thought we’re living by a set of superstitions, and they’re not true and we have to dispense with them.. And so that was Copernicus, and that was Darwin, and that was Freud, that was these repeated blows that our symbolic culture took at the hands of something it had fostered and created and….30:00 Nietzsche said something as well at the same time, when he remarked on this consequence, he said one of the most terrible things about discovering that a system you believed in no longer functions, is no longer sufficient or can be undermined, is that it raises the specter that all such systems have the same flaws! You know, sometimes you can jump from Atheism to Christianity and from Christianity to Socialism say in successive leaps, and then you’re someone who’s faithless from within the perspective of a given system but you’re faithful to the idea that are in fact SYSTEMS that will work!  But if your system fails enough then you can end up in a situation where you don’t even have any faith in the idea that systems as such can work31:00  and that makes you nihilistic. And Nietzsche saw that as the origin of the specter of nihilism, hopelessness fundamentally. Now it’s more complicated than that because there are underground reasons, so to speak, for being nihilistic, that have nothing to do with the mere collapse of a rational belief system. And I’ll talk about those too. And he also talked about the inevitable rise of totalitarianism, as a medication for the loss of all meaning. In some sense, you might say well if you’re in a chaotic state because you no longer know what to believe, it’s very – and someone offers you set of certainties to guide your life by –  then it’s very attractive for you to reach out and grip onto those with all of your soul, so to speak, because that stops you from merely being adrift. And then there’s underground reasons32:00 for that too, that I’ll also return to. So the first question is, was it necessary for the sense of truth that Nietzsche described as developed by the Judeo-Christian tradition that then manifested itself in the scientific methodology to turn against the symbolic foundation of that structure and demolish it, was that inevitable and was it correct? And that’s the first question. And so, Jung’s answer to that was: the conflict between science and religion, is a consequence of the immature states of both of those domains of thinking, it’s not built in to the structure per say, it’s just that we aren’t good enough at33:00 being religious, or good enough at being scientific in order to see how they might be reconciled. Now that’s a hell of claim! And it’s a frightening claim.  And this speaks to some degree for the underground reasons for being nihilistic. The terrible thing about being nihilistic is that nothing you do has any meaning and that’s not so good, because actually, actually it’s untrue. Because there are forms of meaning of meaning in life that nihilism won’t protect you from. Or even increase your exposure to and those are the tragic meanings of life. I don’t care how nihilistic you are, what you don’t believe in , you’re going to believe in your own pain , you’re gonna believe in your own anxiety, you’re gonna believe in the fact of pain and anxiety for everyone else. You’re gonna believe in tragedy. You can’t think yourself out of the catastrophe of the world from being nihilistic. So the negative meanings remain. You can dispense with the34:00 positive meanings which seems to be a bad bargain, but the upside of doing that is quite straightforward. If I said to you, here’s your alternatives: nothing you do matters or has any meaning, alternative one. Everything you do matters and has meaning. Which one would you pick? And you might think well of course I would go for the second alternative, because the first one is so horrifying. But the truth of the matter is the second one is even more horrifying! Because it means that the things that you do, for better or for worse actually do matter! And in some sense your responsible for them, not only for the effect that they have on you in the immediate circumstances of your life.  But for the effect that they have radiating out from you to the other people you are networked too, and as they make waves through time!  It could be everything you do does matter! That every choice that you make matters. And I do believe that that’s35:00 the case, that you’re constantly making choices between good and evil and that determines the destiny of being. And it isn’t obvious to me at all that that’s something you would wish upon yourself. So one of the advantages to being nihilistic is that it enables you to be totally irresponsible even though the price you pay is the sacrifice of all positive meaning. Well so much for the intellectual purity of nihilism and so those sorts of things have to be considered very deeply. Because when someone says , “well I’m hopeless” sometimes it’s because they’re suffering and people can suffer terribly , but sometimes it’s because they don’t want to be responsible for anything. And no wonder! Back to Jung’s point. Jung started to examine religious ideation, I would say symbolically. But it’s more complicated than that because36:00 you might think that the attempt to analyze religious thinking symbolically would reduce it to nothing but psychology, but that isn’t what happens precisely, because as you reduce the religious ideas to psychology, you elevate the psyche and so they meet in the middle. This is something Jung understood, very, very well. It was for that reason that he believed, that Christ was a symbol of the Self, the Self being your full totality, that might be one way of thinking about. Everything that you could conceivably be if you were everything that you could be. And that’s that potential that rests inside you and that everyone knows about, we also speak about because we take people to task when we say “you’re not living up to your potential”.  And everyone knows what that means but no one knows what it means, because what the hell is that potential, it’s not something that’s real! By definition it’s something virtual, it’s something that is yet to be and may never be. But we still treat it as if its real, and we also treat the entire world as if it’s made out of potential.37:00  I believe that that is the correct way of viewing the world, it’s not the dead matter of the eighteenth century rationalist or empiricist. It’s the living domain of potential that we interact with on a regular basis, from which, at least to some degree, we extract our own potential. Well here’s a rough outline of the story that Jung told, that I’ve been working on so I’m gonna tell as I understand it. According to the selection of stories that were encapsulated in the biblical tradition. The world is roughly is 6000 years old, and of course at one level of analysis that’s palpably absurd, I would say. And also, narrow, because I think to conceptualize the world as 15 billion years old, with the developmental history that extends across that massive amount of time38:00  and to note that it extends incomprehensibly, vastly outward is a much more magnificent view of the cosmos then the rather constrained cosmos that we inherited from thinkers in the middle east say ten thousand years ago. But there’s something about it that’s true. And the truth in it seems to be its relationship to the origin of civilization, because it is the case that civilization everywhere in the world , of the sort that we would regard as complex and technological is about six thousand years old. Why that is, is not so self-evident. Although I suspect, it has something to do with how long it took us to reformulate ourselves after the ice age which was roughly only fifteen thousand years ago. It’s not really that far away in time. So that’s the first thing. But the second thing is, what the story, the creation stories in Genesis, for example, actually mean. Because they actually mean something39:00 and what they mean is absolutely remarkable in my estimation. And so I’m gonna tell you a little bit about that story. Because it’s necessary to understand what the story means to determine if what Nietzsche said about the inevitable destruction of our symbolic religious structure by science was inevitable and necessary. And I think the answer to that is no! We just didn’t understand what the hell we were doing , any more than we really understand why we put up a Christmas trees at Christmas. So we do that in part, because the Christmas tree is a symbol of life, because the tree is a symbol of life, because we inhabited trees for untold millions of years and we put lights on the trees to symbolize the coming back into the darkness of midwinter of the sun and the light. So we play this symbolic game that celebrates both life and the emergence of life in consciousness and we associate that with the birth of the Savior. But we don’t know that we’re doing that! But we do it anyways, and we do that sort of thing all the time.  Because we’re smarter than we know!40:00 And that has to be the case because we don’t know ourselves! We wouldn’t need a psychology or a sociology, an anthropology or any of those things if we were transparent to ourselves. We’re machines, so to speak, that are far more intelligent and wise than the machines themselves can understand! And we reveal ourselves to ourselves in our actions and our symbolic gestures constantly and then have to reflect on that to try to understand what it is that we’re up to! So here’s the idea that lurks at the beginning of Genesis. There’s three elements that are involved in the creation of habitable order from chaos at the beginning of time. One of them is whatever is represented by God the Father and one of them is whatever’s  represented by the Chaos that exists at the same and the other is whatever is represented by the idea of God’s word,41:00 that’s the Logos, from a Christian perspective, which is a very, very strange idea. So there’s this idea that was developed over the course of thousands of years, that the redeeming Savior was also the thing that God used to extract habitual order out of chaos at the beginning of time. It’s a very strange idea, and to assimilate an idea of that preposterousness and magnitude to mere pre-rational superstition is foolish first of all, because we don’t even understand what it means. But it means something utterly profoundly and it remains something that we cannot forget, we forget it at our peril! The story at the beginning of Genesis, means that structure, that’s the Father, that’s the patriarchy if you will, structure extracts habitual order from chaos through speech. That’s what we do. It says in Genesis as well that humans beings42:00 are made in the image of God and that’s why! Because we’ve observed these ancient ideas, they were created with so much blood and effort, that it’s incalculable, you cannot contemplate it. The idea is that there’s is something about the human being, whatever it is that makes us conscious that interacts with the chaotic potential that constitutes reality and extracts out from that the order within from which we live. And that there’s something divine about that. And that’s the value of the human being, right? That’s the ineradicable value of the human being. The idea that each individual, even criminals, even murderers, the worst and most reprehensible people have to be treated with the respect due a divinity. Because we partake in the capacity to extract habitable order from chaos , with our consciousness, with our speech and with our capacity to communicate, and we recognize in so far as we each recognize the other as valuable, it’s predicated on that observation,43:00 we each have something to offer each other, and something vital. And you know that, if you engage in a real conversation with someone, a meaningful conversation that suspends your sense of fragile mortality for a moment. You understand that in that communication between people, something of inestimable value emerges that you have to pursue. And you live for that!  You live for that relationship with yourself, you live for that discovery of that relationship when you’re engaged in an artistic pursuit. It’s the core of meaning in life, and it’s not an illusion. In fact, it’s a manifestation of the highest functions of your nervous system. Because what your nervous system does is signal to you that you’re in a place and time that you cannot see when you’re engaged in something meaningful! It comes upon and it’s the cure for the catastrophes of tragic mortality that wonderful engagement in what’s meaningful that you do and can and do experience and you can get better44:00  at experiencing if you practice and that’s because your nervous system, which has evolved over billions years, has learned to tell you when you’re standing on the border between chaos and order. And keeping them in balance and that’s what manifests itself as meaningful! And that’s the same phenomena that’s referred to in the creation stories in Genesis,  and it’s the same idea that’s reflected in the strange Christian assistance that the thing that saves mankind is the same thing that draws order from chaos at the beginning of time. It’s unbelievably brilliant! And we’ve been trying to figure it out for who knows how long? Forever! And have never been to fully articulate, because it’s so complicated, it’s such a complicated idea. But there’s nothing in the least that’s illusory about it. The habitable order45:00 that is created at the beginning of time, that’s paradise right, paradise that’s a walled garden. It’s a well–watered place, that’s what “Eden” means, paradise means paradiso, walled garden, and that’s where Adam and Eve are first put and why is that? Well it’s because, we do come in male and female form, that’s part of it, that’s part of our eternal landscape, that’s how you could think about it. It’s the landscape that transcends all landscapes, it’s the landscape that is what all landscapes have in common that’s what it is, that’s what makes it an archetype. It’s a walled garden, why? Well the walls are structure and culture and the garden is nature and all that says is that people live in an amalgam of nature and culture and of course that’s precisely the case! And that’s another variant of the ordered chaos juxtaposition order being culture and chaos being nature, so we live eternally, and the balance between nature and culture and if its properly balanced it’s as close to paradise as it can get.46:00 But paradise is flawed and why is it flawed? Because there’s always something lurking in it that can turn it upside down. And that’s the snake and the reason it’s a snake, is because the circuits that we use to process the things that turn our lives upside down is the same circuit that our tree dwelling ancestors used to identify predators sixty million years ago! And so the symbolic structure has remained exactly the same! That which lies outside what you understand is predatory and dangerous, well that’s why you demonize others, foreign others, because they do stand in that relationship to you and you use extraordinarily deep circuitry to do that, but human beings being slightly smarter than your average chimpanzee also have noted that the terrible predator that lurks outside the domain of what you understand is also the thing that bears gold, right? And that’s the classic dragon myth, the hero goes out beyond the confines of order47:00 and culture into the chaotic unknown to confront the ultimate predator whose simultaneously offers the best that can possible be gathered, and that’s what human beings are like! Predator animals and prey animals simultaneously. We’ve learned to represent the unknown that threatens us hideously with a multitude of paralyzing snakes, in the head of Medusa but continually also offers us precisely what we need to continue our movement forward. And everyone knows that, which is why we go to movies that tell us that over and over and over and over and over. Trying to learn what it means and that’s what it means, and that’s what it means to partake in the Logos, and the Logos, the reason that I made the videos that I made in September in relationship to free speech, is because I know that respect for the Logos and respect for the free speech are the same thing! And without that respect our societies cannot maintain their structure,48:00 differentiate, and progress, they cannot do it!  We use our free speech to face the chaotic potential of the world and it’s horrors, to structure it, to understand, to communicate about it and to reach consensus. It’s the mechanism by which we adapt there can be no restrictions put upon that unless you wanna sacrifice adaptation and wouldn’t recommend that! Things get stale, old, decayed, dead and dangerous with extraordinary rapidity, if living people don’t maintain their responsibility to update the state, and there’s no difference between that and diving down into the chaotic depths and rescuing your father from the belly of the whale, it’s exactly the same idea, it’s an ancient, ancient idea!  And the reason that we haven’t forgotten about it, was because everyone who forgot it died! So unless that’s where we wanna go,49:00  we better stop forgetting about it! Nietzsche said that after God had died, there would be two things that happen, one would be the emergence of Nihilism as a temptation. We already discussed Nihilism. It’s like it’s a logical consequence from the collapse of value systems. But it’s also a place for the irresponsible to hide, fine. Nihilism. Totalitarianism, well, Nietzsche believed that once you had experienced the collapse of one value system you were unlikely to put your faith in any value systems. So then why totalitarianism? Particularly, say, in its nationalist and communitarian forms, which are the two forms we saw act as immense devils in the twentieth century, right? With nationalism50:00  being pushed most forcefully forward, by the sorts of political creeds that were exemplified by the Nazis and with communitarianism being put forth by the sort of creeds that were exemplified by the Soviet Union. Both absolutely catastrophic! Evolutionary dead ends. Well nationalism is easier to understand, I think. Because you need an identity, and it has to be collective because human beings live collectively. I mean, it’s the fact we share an identity that we can all sit here in this room peacefully because the identity is partly who you think you are.  But it’s also partly what you expect from the world and from others because you have an identity that is similar to you, you can sit together peacefully, because you expect and desire something, and so do you and it’s the same thing! And that’s what it means to have a shared culture. And so you can’t, you have to defend that culture and it has to be of51:00 sufficient let’s say tightness or magnitude, it makes sense to belong to it, it’s not so diverse and chaotic that it means nothing. I think that part of the reason of why we are seeing a return to nationalism in places like Europe is because, the European identity is so amorphous, that people can’t establish a relationship with it and that’s not a good thing. Because identity is something you have to have a relationship with, and so you know it’s your identity, it’s the identity of you within your family, the identity of your family within the small community, of friends that surround you and then the broader community of the town and the somewhat broader community of the province and the state and so forth. But as it expands  it gets vague and it disperses and at some point the identity that’s universal is so all encompassing that it means nothing at all and leaves people chaotic. And so that’s what’s happening at least in Europe, it’s happening to some degree in the United States as well because52:00 we’ve been pushed so quickly forward into adopting a global identity that people are shaking because that’s too amorphous for them and so we pulled back, and say no we need to be around people who we understand, which of course is absolutely true. Now the downside of the nationalist endeavor is that you also need to be around people that you aren’t alike and don’t understand partly because they exist and if you don’t take them into account you’re going to have a war with them, which is a very bad idea, but also because they have something to offer. And so we’re trying to sort out the proper balance between differentiated identity say at the nation state level and the global identity that seems to be manifesting itself partly because of our widespread electronic communication. So ok, nationalism beckons if you’re in a chaotic state. You know I heard the Gallup people, the pollsters at one point, I’ve never seen this made public but I remember it very well, said that,53:00 this was back when Quebec was still , a large proportion of the Quebocois of the population was still agitating for separatism, I always looked at that it made perfect sense. Because, if Catholicism collapses it leaves a void, what are you going to fill the void with? Well it’s either nihilism, which we’ve already discussed, well or what? Well Nationalism, obviously!  The Gallup people said that if you were a lapsed Catholic you were ten times more likely to be a separatist, perfect, exactly what you’d expect. Because you have to have an identity. So you turn from Church to State, well that’s fine if you think the State is the ultimate identity. And that’s really the story that is being sold to people who are sold a nationalist story, the state is the ultimate identity. It’s like well actually that’s technically wrong, that’s why it’s wrong. It’s not wrong because it’s ideologically wrong or morally wrong precisely, it’s wrong because it’s technically wrong, because the problem with the state is the state54:00  is what’s uniform across people. And the thing is that we need what’s actually diverse across people in order to rejuvenate the state and to keep it awake and so if you reduce individuals to what’s homogeneous about them across all people, you eradicate the very variability that allows people to adapt to new things, and because we are constantly presented with new things we need to keep that individual variability, paramount! Because it’s upon that variability that the very state depends, and that’s actually what the West discovered, that’s why we have always subordinated the state to the divinity of the individual and that’s expressed as I’ve already said in the primacy of free speech in our civilization. It’s the cornerstone, the primacy of free speech and it’s because the individual has something to offer the state and so state identity is something that can only, it can structure and it can reassure55:00  but it also constrains too, to a great degree. So societies that become only state, immediately become old and blind, malevolent, and collapse! And that’s an ancient story, the Egyptians had this figured out 3,000 years ago, in their fundamental mythologies. They had this deity named Osiris, who was threatened by his evil brother Set, who later became the Christian Satan, the words are related etymologically. And Set was like Scar in the Lion King, he was waiting in the wings, for the old king to turn a blind eye, so that he could chop him into pieces and rule in a malevolent way across the entire state. The Egyptians had another deity, Horus, who was the son of Osiris, and the queen of the underworld, Isis, who is the eye, the Egyptian eye, who was the falcon because falcons can see! And Horus was different from Osiris because he knew what Set was up to, he grew up outside the kingdom like King Arthur56:00 and came back and triumphed and overcame Set, losing an eye in the process. He overcame his evil uncle, and banished him to the corners of the world and then he took his eye and went into the underworld where his father Osiris was living the life of a dead ghost , that’s one way of thinking about it, he gave him his eye! And that revivified Osiris and then Horus and Osiris when back up to the surface from the chaotic underworld and their union was the symbol of what the pharaoh had to manifest in order to rule Egypt properly. The Egyptians figured that out 3,000 years ago, in their great story. But it’s very difficult to make something up like at an articulated reality but that is the relationship that has to obtain between the individual and the state. The state is a corpse, the state is dead, but it’s a gift that the dead have given to you, and you have to provide it with vision ! And with speech! Because otherwise it can only blunder around like a zombie!  57:00 You go to university, you become educated so you can serve as the eye and the mouth of the rejuvenated state. That’s the purpose of developing say an education in the humanities when there was still such a thing left ! But that’s the purpose of that education, is to turn you into the thing that ensures the entire ship doesn’t founder and sink, and that’s your responsibility and if you’re looking for a meaning in your life, THAT’S THE MEANING! Keep the state afloat, why? Well because it’s better for us all to be in a ship then drowning in the icy water and that’s the alternative. If you find that the tragedy of life is too much to bear without becoming resentful and bitter, and murderous and even genocidal, it means you haven’t picked up enough responsibility because if you picked up enough responsibility for the revivification of the state and the eradication of unnecessary suffering you’d find enough meaning in that, so the idea of meaninglessness would vanish in an instant! 58:00 You’d have more meaning than you knew what do with! And that’s a terrifying thing as well! But to fight off one terrifying thing, the specter of mortality and insanity and finitude and death, you need another monster, of equivalent size and that’s one you can find! And that’s one you can bear up! And that’s one you can live! And that’s what we need to do! Because if we don’t do that then ALL…HELL…BREAKS…LOOSE! Really! Really! Eternally, that’s what those stories mean! Viewed in this light, you can understand postmodernism, because postmodernism manages as a response to the Nietzchean dilemma, right? The cornerstone has been demolished by rational critique and no wonder it needed to be criticized but it needed to be more deeply understood59:00 and criticism and deep understanding are the same thing, unless the criticism is only destruction. Because if you criticize something , what you’re doing is you’re separating the wheat from the chaff, you’re not burning all of it! You’re saying well not this, not this, but definitely this, definitely this! And that’s what education should provide you with the opportunity to do as well, what should we conserve and what should we dispense with. Well we can conserve what’s centrally true and now we need to understand it, we have to conserve the idea that the individual has an infinite responsibility to the direction of being and we know that! You know perfectly well that you live in a relationship with your own conscience. And when you violate the moral order that’s part and parcel or your soul, you’re ashamed and hide and get bitter and then you get angry, you can’t show your face to other people, you can’t even look at yourself in the mirror, and you know perfectly well that’s true, even though you may not know what to do about it or how to get out of it . There’s a moral order built into human beings. If there wasn’t, there would be no way we could even communicate with one another,1:00:00  because there would be no rules of communication, there would be nothing we mutually wanted or mutually expected from one another. You know one of the things I figured out is that we’re all appalled when we run into another person who is not yet the redeemer.  Every person you ever meet you’re dissatisfied with because they’re not who they could be and your broadcasting that message in everyone all the time. You’re not who you could be! You’re not who you could be! You’re not who you could be! I’m not who I could be! And we’re all facing each other with our emotional displays, pleading with each other to become that which we could become. And everyone knows it! But we won’t do and it’s no wonder! The postmodernists, they are the logical conclusion of the Nietzchian dilemma, God is dead, the value structure collapsed,1:01:00 the specter arises over all structures collapsing. That’s the postmodernist dogma: all value structures have collapsed. They are only there for the purposes of exclusion, they have no intrinsic value, it’s a very, very powerful argument. That’s why it dominates the universities. That and the fact it allows people to dispense with their moral responsibility, which is something that is never discussed by the postmodernist, but you have to give the devil his due! What’s the problem with postmodernism? Well if all values structures have collapsed then there’s nothing to do! Because in order to do something one thing has to be better than another because otherwise, why do it! And so people who are ensconced in the postmodern tradition, are undermined by their own philosophy. They can deconstruct their own deconstruction in which case they might as well just sit there and do nothing!1:02:00 Which would actually be preferable to what they’re doing now! So how do they extract themselves from that dilemma, they do it illogically, but they don’t care! Because the postmodernists don’t believe in logic! That’s a reflection of the Logos, which they have dispensed with, dialogue they don’t believe in, because that’s a reflection of the Logos, which they’ve dispensed with. Logic and dialogue are irrelevant. Well that does bring up the problem of what to do! Well the postmodernists finesse that by reverting that to the Marxist doctrines from which postmodernism emerged! So they say “well yeah, you can’t get any direction from postmodernism, but we’re not gonna worry about that because we don’t worry about such things, what we’ll do is just use sleight of hand to push forward the communitarian doctrines of which our original hypothesis emerged”. And everyone says “well, we’ll turn a blind eye to the paradox because we1:03:00 actually need something to do and plus to the degree that we’re communitarian we can take out our nihilistic resentment and arrogance and ingratitude on every single person we deemed to have something more than we have!” And so if you’re wondering why certain values can exist in the absence of any value , you have to look no farther than to understand that people who are desperate or chaotic will still be angry and destructive! And they can manifest that perfectly with the moral mask that says “well I’m not really after what you have, because you have a little more than me, I’m speaking on behalf of these people who have even less!” It’s absolute nonsense! It’s so funny watching Yale students complain of the privileged! They’re in the top one tenth of one hundredth of a percent of people who’ve lived in the entire history of the planet! Much less just the people that are on the planet now,1:04:00 they’re the dominating patriarchy in training, right? They’re baby representatives of the patriarchy and all they do is complain about that tiny, tiny, infinitesimal fraction of people who have slightly more than they have now! It’s appalling! And their idiot professors, pat them on the back and send them out in the world to do that instead of teaching them how to live! They damage their mental health! They hurt our society! They’re bringing things down and that’s what they’re aiming at! The postmodernists manage to be nihilistic and totalitarian at the same time! Which is something that not even Nietzsche dreamed about despite the fact that he had the greatest imagination for pathology that perhaps ever existed! In addition, they combine the nihilism and totalitarianism, with the worst aspects of dogmatic religion. Because what they’ve essentially established1:05:00 is a cult! Into which children who attend university are now indoctrinated at great cost I might add. And with very little practical outcome. So what’s the alternative, given that they have a point. Well as far as I can tell, the alternative is a proper return to the past! And that is precisely to journey into the chaos, to look at the worst possible thing and to pull the dead father out from the chaotic depths, that’s how you stop being a puppet! Someone’s who’s strings are being pulled by forces they do not understand behind the scenes. You find out what’s great about your culture, this thing that has provided with everything we see in this room, this amazing warmth that we’re experiencing when its thirty bloody below outside. The fact the electricity is on, and the computations resources are working and we can all sit here peacefully and no one is hungry. In fact we’re too fat!1:06:00  That’s our big problem. Oh no! We have so much stuff, we’re getting fat! Yeah well that’s a good problem to have, we should have some gratitude for what’s been produced that’s brought us up to this point. And we need to wake up and understand what we’re doing that’s what people like, that’s what the psychoanalysts were trying to do in the twentieth century. That’s what all the great clinicians were trying to do. And I would say above all else, that was what was Carl Jung was trying to do. He believed, firmly, that the idea of the divine spark within the individual was a metaphysical reality by which he meant a reality that actually transcended and existed superordinate to the physical reality, a more real reality, that’s what ever consciousness is.  Something we understand from the scientific perspective, not at all! It’s been represented in our mythology since far back as we can push them as an independent agent in the world. Giving rise to form.1:07:00  That’s how we treat each other, that’s he we recognize ourselves, that’s how we judge each other. You make your bed, and then you lie in in. And everyone know is it. That’s not to say your subject to random and chaotic circumstances and the tragedy of life, just because you can do some things doesn’t mean you can do everything. But you can do some things! And if you don’t do them , then things fall apart. And the problem with things falling apart, is that you will be happy about it to the degree that you’re not trying to repair them. Because to the degree you do not manifest what’s within you, then your life falls apart around you and everything that could make you bitter multiplies, until you’re in a situation where you want the destruction. You want to bring it on and it’s not surprising. Because life can so terrible that the question should whether it should exist at all can be a real question. But the answer to that is, is life so terrible that it shouldn’t exist?1:08:00  Well the answer is, it depends on how you live it. And if your life is so terrible that you can’t bear it then it raises the question as to whether or not you’re living it properly and that’s not to say that people don’t suffer under burdens that are too great for them to bear, they certainly do. It doesn’t matter, because if you let that embitter you, if you let that destroy your allegiance to the proper path all it does is make that worse and everything else. It’s no way out. So what did I learn from studying the terrible situation that obtained in the mid nineteen eighties when the Soviets and the West had tens of thousands of hydrogen bombs1:09:00  pointed at each other, ready to go at a moment’s notice? Why did that happen? What did I learn? It was simple. The reason that that situation existed was because I was not good enough, I was not good enough. The reason that the terrible situations in the world exist now is because you’re not good enough, you’re not good enough, you’re not good enough. We can solve any problem, we can solve ANY problem. If we used all the resources that are available to us, if we lived properly we have no idea what we could turn what were in, into! So I would say, you support free speech because it’s the mechanism that maintains the sanity of the individual and society.  And you live in relationship with the spoken truth to the best of your ability. Because the alternative is hell!1:10:00 And if hell is what you want, then you can remain arrogant, resentful, and deceitful.  But if you wanna work toward better the world, to bring it up to what it might be! Then you speak forthrightly, you clarify yourself and you act properly in the world. And then you see what happens. And this is the final thing I’ll say. I spent a long time, studying the Sermon on the Mound, it’s a key document. It’s Christ’s commentary, on the ten commandments, in a sense, the question being: If you codify the rules by which a society might function, is there something within the structure of the rules that rises above them that acts as the fundamental principle from which their all derived? It’s the ultimate question of human ethics. What is the highest principle? And the answer that’s put forth in Sermon on the Mound is quite straight forward: Aim at the highest possible good that you can conceive of.1:11:00  Whatever that is that you can conceive of. That serves as your God, for all intents and purposes. Having aligned yourself with that Good, speak the truth. And see what happens!  That’s the act of Faith! The act of faith is whatever the truth reveals is the best of all possible worlds, regardless how it appears to you now. It’s a guess, right? It’s something you stake a bet on. Well what do you think? The best of all possible worlds will be brought into being by deceit?  It seems unlikely, you know that doesn’t work in your own life you tangled yourself up in your own lies, right? One lie breeds ten and ten breeds a hundred and maybe you put the consequences on down the road and you don’t fall into the pit for five or six years. Maybe you’ve even forgotten why you fell in when you finally do fall in, but everyone knows, everyone knows that you don’t get away with anything.1:12:00 And so the issue well what would happen if you just said what you thought? Stupid as it is, inaccurate as it, and listen to people, criticize you in response to shape you and make you more articulate, what would your life be like? And the answer to that is, and I know this to be true! I’ve worked with many, many people on precisely this problem. Your life gets better and better and better and, and richer and deeper. But that comes with a heavier and heavier burden of responsibility. Well that’s okay! You use the observation of your own capability to bear responsibility, to buttress yourself against the terrors of being finite. You say” weak and miserable as I am, I can still stand up to the terrible tragedy of life and prevail! And that’s good enough!” Thank you.One way of conceptualizing yourself is that you’re one speck of dust among 7 billion. And when you conceptualize yourself that way, you might think, well what difference does it make what i say or do?” And that’s actually quite convenient for you because if it doesn’t matter what you say or do then you don’t have any responsibility and you can do whatever you want. The price you pay for that is a bit of nihilism but if you don’t have to shoulder any responsibility that’s a small price to pay. Another – that’s the underground motivation for nihilism. The other way of looking at it – and this is actually the accurate way of looking at it – is that you’re in a network – you’re a node in a network, so, you can do a little arithmetic very rapidly and just figure out how powerful you are. You know a thousand people. You’re gonna know more than that over the course of your life, but let’s say a thousand for the sake of argument for now. They know a thousand people. That means that you’re one person away from a million people and two persons away from a billion people. And you’re the centre of that network. And now the way networks work is that information propagates in a network manner. So don’t underestimate the power of your speech. Now, you know, Western culture is (…) logo-centric let’s say, so we say, yeah, that’s just fine, that’s exactly what it is. It is predicated on the idea of the logos. That the logos is the sacred element of Western culture. And what does that mean? It means that your capacity for speech is divine. It’s the thing that generates order from chaos, and then sometimes turns pathological order into chaos when it has to. Don’t underestimate the power of truth – there is nothing more powerful. Now in order to speak what you might regard as the truth, you have to let go of the outcome. You have to think: Alright i’m gonna say what i think, stupid as i am, biased as i am, ignorant as i am, i am going to state what i think as clearly as i can. And i’m going to live with the consequences no matter what they are. Now the reason you think that – that’s an element of Faith. The idea is that nothing brings a better world into being than the stated truth. Now you might have to pay a price for that, but that’s fine. You’re going to pay a price for every bloody thing you do. And everything you don’t do. You don’t get to choose to not pay a price. You get to choose which poison you’re going to take.  That’s it. So if you’re going to stand up for something, stand up for your truth. It’ll shape you because people will respond and object and tell you why you’re a fool and a biased moron and why you’re ignorant. And then if you listen to them, you’ll be just that much less like that the next time you say something. And if you do that for five years, you’ll be so damn tough and articulate and able to communicate and withstand pressure that you won’t even recognize yourself. And then you’ll be a force to contend with. And you don’t get to wait until.. Because i get letters like … gets all the time from faculty members in particularly that say, Well, you know, when i get tenure, it’s like, and then they think, well when i’m an associate professor, and then they think, when i’m a full professor. It’s like, if you’re a professor already, you’re like the most protected person on the history of the planet. You know? And you (…) well, okay but what one of the things that indicates is that it is almost impossible to provide people with enough protection so that they feel safe to speak. Okay so we’ll address that directly – it is not safe to speak, and it never will be. But the thing you’ve got to keep in mind is that it is even less safe not to speak, right? It’s a balance of risks. It’s like you want to pay the price for being who you are and stating your mode of being in the world or do you want to pay the price for being a bloody serf – one that’s enslaved him or herself. Well that’s a major price, man. That thing unfolds over decades and you’ll just be a miserable worm at the end of about 20 years of that, right? No self respect, no power, no ability to voice your opinions, nothing left but resentment because everyone’s against you, because of course you’ve never stood up for yourself. It’s like, say what you think carefully, pay attention to your words. The price is – it’s a price you want to pay, if you are willing to believe that truth is the cornerstone of society. and in the most real sense, if you’re willing to take that leap, then tell the truth and see what happens, and nothing better could possibly happen to you. There’ll be ups and downs and there’ll be pushback and it’ll be controversy and all of that, but it doesn’t matter. The truth is what makes the world – the truth is what redeems the world from hell. And that’s the truth.  And we saw plenty of hell over the last 100 years, you know, and we haven’t learned a bloody thing from it. It’s like, wake up! Tell the truth! Tell the truth or at least don’t lie and that’s a start. And you gotta understand that’s a risk. But i will – I have one more brief thing to say about that. So, you know, i said what i had to say back in September and i’m sure that i could have done it better and many people have told me how i could have done it better, although it didn’t mean they would actually do it, but… And you know, my job was at risk, serious risk for about two months, it destabilized my family who were being very brave about this, so like thumbs up to them man, they just stood by me. But here’s the optimistic news, is the university has left me alone completely. I shook hands with the dean two weeks ago. We’re on friendly terms. They don’t want this to go any farther than it has already. The students were tremendously welcoming when i came back to teach in January. I haven’t had a single negative incident at the university and I’ve received thousands of letters from people all over the world – all of which have been in support. I received two negative letters – that’s it. Two. So the people.. people have an inchoate longing to have this sort of thing that we’re talking about articulated, and so don’t be thinking you’re alone. It’s just that people can’t talk, they’re afraid to talk or they don’t know what to say. And those are real problems, so if you’re reasonably articulate, like start talking and sharpen yourself up. I mean, the enemy is a cloud. They’re a cloud of gnats, they’re only courageous in groups, they’re only courageous in mobs. If you stand your ground and don’t apologize and articulate things properly, they’ll disperse around you like they’re not even there. So most of it’s illusion. So don’t be… be afraid, but be afraid of the right thing. And the right thing you should be afraid of is not saying what you say, because that’s the same as not being. And here you are suffering away. You might as well be at the same time. At least then there’s something to you. Well thank you all very much for coming. It's really shocking to me that you don't have anything better to do on a Tuesday night. Seriously though, it's very strange in some sense that there's so many of you here to listen to a sequence of lectures on the psychological significance of the biblical stories. It is something I've wanted to do for a long time, but it still does surprise me that there's a ready audience for it. That's good, we'll see how it goes. I'll start with this, because it's the right question: why bother doing this? And I don't mean why should I bother  I have my own reasons for doing it  but you might think, That's a good question. It's a contradictory document that's been cobbled together over thousands of years. It's outlasted many, many kingdoms. It's really interesting that it turns out a book is more durable than stone. It's more durable than a castle. It's more durable than an empire. It's really interesting that something so evanescent can be so long-living. So there's that; that's kind of a mystery. I'm approaching this whole scenario, the Biblical stories, as if they're a mystery, fundamentally because they are. There's a lot we don't understand about them. We don't understand how they came about. We don't really understand how they were put together. We don't understand why they had such an unbelievable impact on civilization. We don't understand how people could have believed them. We don't understand what it means that we don't believe them now, or even what it would mean if we did believe them. On top of all that, there's the additional problem  which isn't specific to me, but is certainly relevant to me  that, no matter how educated you are, you're not educated enough to discuss the psychological significance of the Biblical stories. But I'm going to do my best, partly because I want to learn more about them. One of the things I've learned is that one of the best ways to learn about something is to talk about it. When I'm lecturing, I'm thinking. I'm not trying to tell you what I know for sure to be the case, because there's lots of things that I don't know for sure to be the case. I'm trying to make sense out of this, and I have been doing this for a long time.. Nietzsche believed that the Catholicization of the phenomena of life and history produced the kind of mind that was then capable of transcending its dogmatic foundations, and concentrating on something else. In this particular case, it happened to be the natural world. Nietzsche believed that Christianity died of its own hand, and that it spent a very long time trying to attune people to the necessity of the truth, absent the corruption, and all that  that's always part of any human endeavour. The truth  the spirit of truth  that was developed by Christianity turned on the roots of Christianity. Everyone woke up and said, or thought, something like, It's like waking up one day and noting that you really don't know why you put a Christmas tree up, but you've been doing it for a long time, and that's what people do. There are reasons Christmas trees came about. The ritual lasts long after the reasons have been forgotten. Nietzsche was a critic of Christianity, and also a champion of its disciplinary capacity. The other thing that Nietzsche believed was that it was not possible to be free unless you had been a slave. By that, he meant that you don't go from childhood to full-fledged adult individuality: you go from child to a state of discipline, which you might think is akin to self-imposed slavery. That would be the best scenario, where you have to discipline yourself to become something specific, before you might be able to reattain the generality you had as a child. He believed that Christianity had played that role for Western civilization. But, in the late 1800s, he announced that God was dead. You often hear of that as something triumphant, but, for Nietzsche, it wasn't. He was too nuanced a thinker to be that simpleminded. Nietzsche understood  and this is something I'm going to try to make clear  that there's a very large amount that we don't know about the structure of experience  that we don't know about reality  and we have our articulated representations of the world. Outside of that, there are things we know absolutely nothing about. There's a buffer between them, and those are things we sort of know something about. But we don't know them in an articulated way. Here's an example: You're arguing with someone close to you, and they're in a bad mood. They're being touchy and unreasonable. You keep the conversation up, and maybe, all of a sudden, they get angry, or maybe they cry. When they cry, they figure out what they're angry about. It has nothing to do with you, even though you might have been what precipitated the argument. That's an interesting phenomena, as far as I'm concerned, because it means that people can know things at one level, without being able to speak what they know at another. In some sense, the thoughts rise up from the body. They do that in moods, images, and actions. We have all sorts of ways that we understand, before we understand in a fully articulated manner. We have this articulated space that we can all discuss. Outside of that, we have something that's more akin to a dream, that we're embedded in. It's an emotional dream, that we're embedded in, and that's based, at least in part, on our actions. I'll describe that later. What's outside of that is what we don't know anything about, at all. The dream is where the mystics and artists live. They're the mediators between the absolutely unknown and the things we know for sure. What that means is that what we know is established on a form of knowledge that we don't really understand. If those two things are out of sync  if our articulated knowledge is out of sync with our dream  then we become dissociated internally. We think things we don't act out, and we act out things we don't dream. That produces a kind of sickness of the spirit. Its cure is something like an integrated system of belief and representation.  which I regard as parasites on an underlying religious substructureto try to organize their thinking. That's a catastrophe, and what Nietzsche foresaw. He knew that, when we knocked the slats out of the base of Western civilization by destroying this representation  this God ideal  we would destabilize, and move back and forth violently between nihilism and the extremes of ideology. He was particularly concerned about radical left ideology, and believed  and predicted this in the late 1800s, which is really an absolute intellectual tour de force of staggering magnitude  that in the 20th century hundreds of millions of people would die because of the replacement of these underlying dream-like structures with this rational but deeply incorrect representation of the world. We've been oscillating back and forth between left and right ever since, with some good sprinkling of nihilism and despair. In some sense, that's the situation of the modern Western person, and increasingly of people in general. I think part of the reason that Islam has its back up with regards to the West, to such a degree  there's many reasons, and not all of them are valid  is that, being still grounded in a dream, they can see that the rootless, questioning mind of the West poses a tremendous danger to the integrity of their culture, and it does. Westerners, us  we undermine ourselves all the time with our searching intellect. I'm not complaining about that. There isn't anything easy that can be done about it. But it's still a sort of fruitful catastrophe, and it has real effects on people's lives. It's not some abstract thing. Lots of times when I've been treating people with depression, for example, or anxiety, they have existential issues. It's not just some psychiatric condition. It's not just that they're tapped off of normal because their brain chemistry is faulty  although, sometimes that happens to be the case. It's that they are overwhelmed by the suffering and complexity of their life, and they're not sure why it's reasonable to continue with it. They can feel the terrible, negative meanings of life, but they are sceptical beyond belief about any of the positive meanings of it. I had one client who's a very brilliant artist. As long as he didn't think, he was fine. He'd go and create, and he was really good at being an artist. He had that personality that was continually creating, and quite brilliant, although he was self-denigrating. But he sawed the branch off that he was sitting on, as soon as he started to think about what he was doing. He'd start to criticize what he was doing  the utility of it  even though it was self-evidently useful. Then it would be very, very hard for him to even motivate himself to create. He always struck me as a good example of the consequences of having your rational intellect divorced, in some way, from your Being  divorced enough so that it actually questions the utility of your Being. It's not a good thing. It's really not a good thing, because it manifests itself not only in individual psychopathologies, but also in social psychopathologies. That's this proclivity of people to get tangled up in ideologies, and I really do think of them as crippled religions. That's the right way to think about them. They're like religion that's missing an arm and a leg, but can still hobble along. It provides a certain amount of security and group identity, but it's warped and twisted and demented and bent, and it's a parasite on something underlying that's rich and true. That's how it looks to me, anyways. I think it's very important that we sort out this problem. I think that there isn't anything more important that needs to be done than that. I've thought that for a long, long time  probably since the early '80s, when I started looking at the role that belief systems played in regulating psychological and social health. You can tell that they do that because of how upset people get if you challenge their belief systems. Why the hell do they care, exactly? What difference does it make if all of your ideological axioms are 100 percent correct? People get unbelievable upset when you poke them in the axioms, so to speak, and it is not by any stretch of the imagination obvious why. There's a fundamental truth that they're standing on. It's like they're on a raft in the middle of the ocean. You're starting to pull out the logs, and they're afraid they're going to fall in and drown. Drown in what? What are the logs protecting them from? Why are they so afraid to move beyond the confines of the ideological system? These are not obvious things. I've been trying to puzzle that out for a very long time. I've done some lectures about that that are on YouTube. Most of you know that. Some of what I'm going to talk about in this series you'll have heard, if you've listened to the YouTube videos, but I'm trying to hit it from different angles., or the Superman. That was one part of the Nietzschean philosophy that the Nazis took out of context and used to fuel their superior man ideology. We know what happened with that. That didn't seem to turn out very well. That's for sure., a developmental psychologist  that I started to understand that our articulated systems of thought are embedded in something like a dream. That dream is informed, in a complex way, by the way we act. We act out things we don't understand, all the time. If that wasn't the case, we wouldn't need psychology, or sociology, or anthropology, or any of that, because we'd be completely transparent to ourselves, and we're clearly not. We're much more complicated than we understand, which means that the way that we behave contains way more information than we know. Part of the dream that surrounds our articulated knowledge is extracted as a consequence of us watching each other behave, and telling stories about it, for thousands and thousands and thousands of years  extracting out patterns of behaviour that characterize humanity, and trying to represent  partly through imitation, but also drama, mythology, literature, art, and all of that  what we're like, so that we can understand what we're like. That process of understanding is what I see unfolding, at least in part, in the Biblical stories. It's halting, partial, awkward, and contradictory, which is one of things that makes the book so complex. But I see, in that, the struggle of humanity to rise above its animal forebears and become conscious of what it means to be human.. It's an absolutely unbelievable thing. Every single one of your ancestors reproduced successfully for 3.5 billion years. It's absolutely unbelievable. We rose out of the dirt and the muck, and here we are, conscious but not knowing, and we're trying to figure out who we are. A set of stories that we've been telling for 3,000 years seems, to me, to have something to offer. variety. They produce intimations of the divine extraordinarily regularly. People have been using drugs like that for God only knows how long  50,000 years, maybe more than that  to produce some sort of intimate union with the divine. We don't understand any of that. When we discovered the psychedelics in the late '60s, it shocked everybody so badly that they were instantly made illegal. They were abandoned, in terms of research, for like 50 years, and it's no wonder, because who the hell expected that? Nobody.. Freud started to collate the information that we had pertaining to the notion that people lived inside a dream. It was Freud that really popularized the idea of the unconscious mind. We take this for granted to such a degree, today, that we don't understand how revolutionary the idea was. What's happened with Freud is that we've taken all the marrow out of his bones and left the husk behind. Now, when we think about Freud, we just think about the husk, because that's everything that's been discarded. But so much of what he discovered is part of our popular conception, now  including the idea that your perceptions, your actions, and your thoughts are all informed and shaped by unconscious motivations that are not part of your voluntary control. That's a very, very strange thing. It's one of the most unsettling things about the psychoanalytic theories. The psychoanalytic theories are something like, You're like a plurality of internal personalities that's loosely linked into a unity. You know that, because you can't control yourself very well  which is one of Jung's objections to Nietzsche's idea that we can create our own values. would be the God of rage; that's the thing that possesses you when you're angry. It has a viewpoint, and it says what it wants to say, and that might have very little to do with what you want to say, when you're being sensible. It doesn't just inhabit you: it inhabits everyone, and it lives forever, and it even inhabits animals. It's this transcendent psychological entity that inhabits the body politic, like a thought inhabiting the brain. That's one way of thinking about it. It's a very strange way of thinking, but it certainly has its merits. Those things, in some sense, are deities. But it's not that simple. Jung got very interested in dreams, and he started to understand the relationship between dreams and myths. He was deeply read in mythology, and he would see, in his client's dreams, echoes of stories that he knew. He started to believe that the dream was the birthplace of the myth and that there was a continual interaction between the two processes: the dream and the story, and storytelling. You can tell your dreams as stories, when you remember them, and some people remember dreams all the time  two or three, at night. I've had clients like that. They often have archetypal dreams that have very clear mythological structures. I think that's more the case with people who are creative  especially if they're a bit unstable at the time  because the dream tends to occupy the space of uncertainty, and to concentrate on fleshing out the unknown reality, before you get a real grip on it. So the dream is the birthplace of thinking. That's a good way of thinking about it, because it's not that clear. It's doing its best to formulate something. That was Jung's notion, as of post-Freud, who believed that there were internal censors that were hiding the dream's true message. That's not what Jung believed. He believed the dream was doing its best to express a reality that was still outside of fully articulated, conscious comprehension. A thought appears in your head, right? That's obvious. Bang  it's nothing you ever asked about. What the hell does that mean? A thought appears in your head. What kind of ridiculous explanation is that? It just doesn't help with anything. That's not a very sophisticated explanation, as it turns out. You might think that those thoughts that you think ...Well, where do they come from? They're often someone else's thoughts  someone long dead. That might be part of it  just like the words you use to think are utterances of people who have been long dead. You're informed by the spirit of your ancestors. That's one way of looking at it. Your motivations speak to; your emotions speak to you; your body speaks to you, and it does all that, at least in part, through the dream. The dream is the birthplace of the fully articulated idea. They don't just come from nowhere fully-fledged. They have a developmental origin, and God only knows how lengthy that origin is. Even to say, Chimpanzees don't say that. It's been something like 3 million years since we broke from chimpanzees  from the common ancestor. They have no articulated knowledge, very little self-representation, and very little self-consciousness. That's not the case with us, at all. We had to painstakingly figure all of this out during that 7 million year voyage. I think some of that's represented and captured in these ancient stories  especially the oldest stories, in Genesis, which are the stories we're going to start with. Some of the archaic nature of the human being is encapsulated in those stories. It's very, very instructive, as far as I can tell. is a good example. Abraham was called on to actually sacrifice his own son, which doesn't really seem like something that a reasonable God would ask you to do. God, in the Old Testament, is frequently cruel, arbitrary, demanding, and paradoxical, which is one of the things that really gives the book life. It wasn't edited by a committee that was concerned with not offending anyone. That's for sure. critique. But my observation has been that people will present a dream and, sometimes, we can extract out real, useful information from it that the person didn't appear to know, and they get a flash of insight. That's a marker that we stumbled on something that unites part of that person that wasn't united before. It pulls things together, which is often what a good story will do, or, sometimes, a good theory. Things snap together for you, and a little light goes on. That's one of the markers that I've used for accuracy and dreams, in my own family. When I was first married, I'd have fights with my wife  arguments about this and that. I'm fairly hot-headed, and I'd get all puffed up and agitated about whatever we were arguing about. She'd go to sleep, which was really annoying. It was so annoying, because I couldn't sleep. I'd be chewing off my fingernails, and she'd be sleeping peacefully beside me. Maddening. But, often, she'd have a dream, and she'd discuss it with me the next morning. We'd unravel what was at the bottom of our argument. That was unbelievably useful, even though it was extraordinary aggravating. I was convinced by Jung. His ideas about the relationship between dreams, mythology, drama, and literature made sense to me, and his ideas about the relationship between man and art., and masks that I have in my house. He's a very interesting person  not particularly literate, and really still steep in this ancient, 13,000-year-old tradition. He's an original language speaker, and the fact that he isn't literate has sort of left him with the mind of someone who is pre-literature. Pre-literature people aren't stupid; they just aren't literate. Their brains are organized differently, in many ways. masks; you know what they look like. His people are closely related to the Haida. It's the same kind of style. He dreams in those animals, and he can remember his dreams. He also talks to his grandparents, who taught him how to carve, in his dreams. Quite often, if he runs into a problem with carving, his grandparents will come, and he'll talk to them. He sees the creatures that he's going to carve, living, in an animated sense, in his imagination. I have no reason to disbelieve him. He's a very, very straightforward person, and he doesn't have the motivation  or the guile, I would say  to invent a story like that. There's just no reason he would possibly do it. I don't think he's told that many people about it. He thinks it's kind of crazy. When he was a kid, he thought he was insane, because he'd had those dreams, all the time, about these creatures, and so forth. It wasn't something he was trumpeting. I've found it fascinating, because I can see in him part of the manifestation of this unbroken tradition. We have no idea how traditions like that are really passed on for thousands and thousands of years. Part of it is oral and memory, part of it's acted out and dramatized, and part of it's going to be imaginative. People who aren't literate store information quite differently than we do. We don't remember anything; it's all written down in books. But if you're from an oral culture  especially if you're trained in that way  you have all of that information at hand. It's so that you can speak it. You can tell the stories, and you really know them. Modern people really don't know what that's like, anymore. I doubt there's more than maybe two of you, in the audience, that could spout from memory a 30-line poem. Poetry was written so that people could do that. That's why we have that form    so that people could remember it and have it with them. But we don't do any of that, anymore. Anyways, back to Jung. Jung was a great believer in the dream. I know that dreams will tell you things that you don't know. Well, how the hell can that be? How in the world can something you think up tell you something you don't know? How does that make any sense? First of all, why don't you understand it? Why does it have to come forth in the form of the dream? It's like something's going on inside you that you don't control. The dream happens to you, just like life happens to you. There is the odd lucid dreamer who can apply a certain amount of conscious control, but most of the time you're laying there, asleep, and this crazy, complicated world manifests itself inside you, and you don't know how. You can't do it when you're awake, and you don't know what it means. It's like, what the hell's going on? That's one of the things that's so damn frightening about the psychoanalysts  you get this both from Freud and Jung. You really start to understand that there are things inside you that control you, instead of the other way around. You can use a bit of reciprocal control, but there's manifestations of spirits, so to speak, inside you, that determine the manner in which you walk through life, and you don't control it. And what does? Is it random? There are people who have claimed that dreams are merely the consequence of random neural firing. I think that theory is absolutely absurd, because there's nothing random about dreams. They are very, very structured, and very, very complex. They're not like snow on a television screen or static on a radio. I've also seen, so often, that people have very coherent dreams, that have a perfect narrative structure. They're fully developed, in some sense. So that theory doesn't go anywhere, with me. I just can't see that as useful, at all. I'm more likely to take the phenomena seriously. There's something to dreams. You dream of the future, then you try to make it into reality. That seems to be an important thing. Or maybe you dream up a nightmare, and try to make that into a reality. People do that, too, if they're hellbent on revenge, for example, and full of hatred and resentment. That manifests itself in terrible fantasies. Those are dreams, then people go act them out. These things are powerful, and whole nations can get caught up in collective dreams. That's what happened to Nazi Germany in the 1930s. It was an absolutely remarkable, amazing, horrific, destructive spectacle. The same thing happened in the Soviet Union, and the same thing happened in China. You have to take these things seriously  you try to understand what's going on.a beautifully painted, absolutely glowing work of art. There were like 20 people standing in front of it, and looking at it. What are those people up to? They don't know. Why did they make a pilgrimage to New York to come and look at that painting? It's not like they know. Why is it worth so much? I know there's a status element to it, but that begs the question: why do those items become such high-status items? What is it about them that's so absolutely remarkable? We're strange creatures. Where does the information that's in the dream come from? It has to come from somewhere. You could think of it as a revelation, because it's like it springs out of the void, and it's new knowledge. You didn't produce it; it just appears. I'm scientifically minded, and I'm quite a rational person. I like to have an explanation of things that's rational and empirical, before I look for any other kind of explanation. I don't want to say that everything that's associated with divinity can be reduced, in some manner, to biology, an evolutionary history, or anything like that. But, insofar as it's possible to do that reduction, I'm going to do that. I'm going to leave the other phenomena floating in the air, because they can't be pinned down. In that category, I would put the category of mystical or religious experience, which we don't understand, at all. Artists observe one another, and they observe people. Then they represent what they see, and transmit the message of what they see, to us. That teaches us to see. We don't necessarily know what it is that we're learning from them, but we're learning something  or, at least, we're acting like we're learning something. We go to movies; we watch stories; we immerse ourselves in fiction, constantly. That's an artistic production, and, for many people, the world of the arts is a living world. That's particularly true if you're a creative person. It's the creative, artistic people that move the knowledge of humanity forward. They do that with their artistic productions, first. They're on the edge. The dancers, poets, visual artists, and musicians do that, and we're not sure what they're doing. We're not sure what musicians are doing. What the hell are they doing? Why do you like music? It gives you deep intimations of the significance of things, and no one questions it. You go to a concert; you're thrilled. It's a quasi-religious experience, particularly if the people really get themselves together, and get the crowd moving. There's something incredibly intense about it, but it makes no sense whatsoever. It's not an easy thing to understand. Music is deeply patterned, and patterned in layers. I think that has something to do with it, because reality is deeply patterned in layers. I think music is representing reality in some fundamental way. We get into the sway of that, and participate in Being. That's part of what makes it such an uplifting experience, but we don't really know that's what we're doing. We just go do it, and it's nourishing for people  young people, in particular. Lots of them live for music. It's where they derive all of their meaning  their cultural identity. Everything that's nourishing comes from their affiliation with their music. That's an amazing thing. The question still remains: where does the information in dreams come from? I think where it comes from is that we watch the patterns that everyone acts out. We watch that forever, and we've got some representations of those patterns that's part of our cultural history. That's what's embedded in fictional accounts of stories between good and evil, the bad guy and the good guy, and the romance. These are canonical patterns of Being, for people, and they deeply affect us, because they represent what it is that we will act out in the world. We flesh that out with the individual information we have about ourselves and other people. There's waves of behavioural patterns that manifest themselves in the crowd, across time. Great dramas are played on the crowd, across time. The artists watch that, and they get intimations of what that is. They write it down, tell us, and we're a little clearer about what we're up to.  we know that what he wrote is fiction. Then we say, Numbers are an abstraction from the underlying reality, but no one in their right mind would really think that numbers aren't true. You could even make a case that the numbers are more real than the things that they represent, because the abstraction is so insanely powerful., and you think, It's an abstraction from this underlying, noisy substrate. People are affected by it because they see that the thing that's represented is part of the pattern of their being. That's the right way to think about it. With these old stories  these ancient stories  it seems, to me, like that process has been occurring for thousands of years. It's like we watched ourselves, and we extracted out some stories. We imitated each other, and we represented that in drama, and then we distilled the drama, and we got a representation of the distillation. And then we did it again, and at the end of that process  it took God only knows how long. They've traced some fairy tales back 10,000 years, in relatively unchanged form. It certainly seems, to me, that the archaeological evidence, for example, suggests that the really old stories that the Bible begins with are at least that old, and are likely embedded in prehistory, which is far older than that. You might say, The answer to that, in part, is that the ancient cultures didn't change fast. They stayed the same; that's the answer. They keep their information moving from generation to generation. That's how they stay the same, and that's how we know. There are archaeological records of rituals that have remained relatively unbroken for up to 20,000 years: it was discovered in caves, in Japan, that were set up for a particular kind of bear worship that was also characteristic of Western Europe. So these things can last for very long periods of time. We're watching each other act in the world, and then the question is, how long have we been watching each other? The answer to that, in some sense, is as long as there have been creatures with nervous systems, and that's a long time. That's some hundreds of millions of years, perhaps longer than that. We've been watching each other, trying to figure out what we're up to, across that entire span of time. Some of that knowledge is built right into your bodies  which is why we can dance with each other, for example. Understanding isn't just something that you have as an abstraction. It's something that you act out. That's what children are doing, when they're learning to rough-and-tumble play. They're learning to integrate their body with the body of someone else in a harmonious way  learning to cooperate and compete. That's all instantiated right into their body. It's not abstract knowledge, and they don't know that they're doing that. They're just doing it. We can even use our body as a representational platform. We've been studying each other for a long time, abstracting out what is it that we're up to, and what should we be up to. That's an even more fundamental question: if you're going to live in the world, and you're going to do it properly, what does properly mean? How is it that you might go about that? It's the right question; it's what everyone wants to know. How do you live in the world? It's not what the world is made of; it's not the same question. How do you live in the world? It's the eternal question of human beings. I guess we're the only species that has ever really asked that question. All the other animals just go and do whatever it is they do. Not us. It's a question, for us. We have to become aware of it. We have to speak it  God only knows why. But that seems to be the situation. So we act, that acting is shaped by the world and society into something that we don't understand, but that we can model. We model it in our stories and with our bodies, and that's where the dream gets its information. The dream is part of the process that's watching everything, and then trying to formulate it. It's trying to get the signal out from the noise and portray it in dramatic form, because the dream is a little drama. And then you get the chance to talk about what that dream is. You have something like articulated knowledge, at that point.intelligent, clear thinking, rational, scientific people. I don't believe that for a moment. I don't think there's any evidence for it. I think we would become so irrational, so rapidly, that the weirdest mysteries of Catholicism would seem positively rational by contrast  and I think that's already happening. You have the unknown world. That's just what you don't know, at all. That's outside the ocean that surrounds the island that you inhabit. Something like that. It's chaos itself. You act in that world, and you act in ways that you don't understand. There's more to your actions than you can understand. One of the things that Jung said  I loved this, when I first understood it. He says that everybody acts out a myth, but very few people know what their myth is. You should know what your myth is, because it might be a tragedy, and maybe you don't want it to be. That's really worth thinking about, because you have a pattern of behaviour that characterizes you. God only knows where you got it. It's partly biological, and it's partly from your parents; it's your unconscious assumptions; it's the way the philosophy of your society has shaped you; and it's aiming you somewhere. Is it aiming you somewhere you want to go? That's a good question. That's part of self-realization. We know we don't understand our actions. Almost every argument you have with someone is about that. It's like, You come up with some half-baked reasons why you did it; you're flailing around in the darkness; you try to give an account for yourself, but you can only do it partially. It's very, very difficult, because you're a complicated animal, with the beginnings of an articulated mind, and you're just way more than you can handle. So you act things out, and that's a kind of competence. Then you imagine what you act out, and you imagine what everyone else acts out. There's a tremendous amount of information in your action, and that information is translated up into the dream, and then into art, mythology and literature. There's a tremendous amount of information in that, and some of that is translated into articulated thought., when Moses comes up with the law. He's wandering around with the Israelites in the desert. They're going left and going right, worshipping idols, having a hell of a time, and getting rebellious. Moses goes up in the mountain, and he has this tremendous revelation in the sight of God. It illuminates him, and he comes down with the law. Moses acted as a judge  I know this is a mythological story  in the desert. He was continually mediating between people who were having problems, and he was constantly trying to keep peace. What are you doing when you're trying to keep peace? You're trying to understand what peace is. You have to apply the principles. What are the principles? Well, you don't know. The principles are whatever satisfied the people enough to make peace.. They were there to begin with. Moses comes forward, and says, That's all historical process condensed into a single story, but, obviously, that happened, because we have written law. In good legal systems, that emerges from the bottom up. English common law is exactly like that: it's single decisions, that are predicated on principles, that are then articulated and made into the body of law. The body of law is something that you act out. That's why it's a body of law. That's why, if you're a good citizen, you act out the body of law. The body of law has principles. Ok, so the question is, what are the principles that guide our behaviour? Well, that's something like what the archaic Israelites meant by  more than that, because it's not sheer physical prowess that keeps a chimp at the top of the hierarchy. It's much more complicated than that. You could say there's a principle that the dominant person manifests, and then you might say that principle shines forth even more brightly, if you know 10 people who are dominant and powerful. Then you could extract out what means from that, and then you can divorce the concept from the people. We had to do that, at some point, because we can say *"power"*, in the human context, and we can imagine what that means. But it's divorced from any specific manifestation of power. How the hell did we do that? That's so complicated. If you're a chimp, the power is in another chimp. It's not some damn abstraction. Think about it. We're in these hierarchies, many of them across centuries. We're trying to figure out what the guiding principle is. We're trying to extract out the core of the guiding principles, and we turn that into a representation of a pattern of being. That's God. It's an abstracted ideal, and it manifests itself in personified form. That's ok, because what we're trying to get at is, in some sense, the essence of what it means to be a properly functioning, properly social, and properly competent individual. We're trying to figure out what that means. You need an embodiment. You need an ideal that's abstracted, that you could act out, that would enable you to understand what that means. That's what we've been driving at. That's the first hypothesis. I'm going to go over some of the attributes of this abstracted ideal that we've formalized as God, but that's the first hypothesis: a philosophical or moral ideal manifests itself, first, as a concrete pattern of behavior that's characteristic of a single individual  and then it's a set of individuals, and then it's an abstraction from that set, and then you have the abstraction, and it's so important. Here's a political implication: One of the debates, we might say, between early Christianity and the late Roman Empire was whether or not an emperor could be God  literally to be deified and put into a temple. You can see why that might happen, because that's someone at the pinnacle of a very steep hierarchy, who has a tremendous amount of power and influence. The Christian response to that was, It's brilliant. You can see how difficult it is to come up with an idea like that, so that even the person who has the power is actually subordinate to a divine principle, for lack of a better word. Even the king himself is subordinate to the principle. We still believe that, because we believe our Prime Minister is subordinate to the damn law. Whatever the body of law, there's a principle inside that even the leader is subordinate to. Without that, you could argue that you can't even have a civilized society, because your leader immediately turns into something that's transcendent and all-powerful. That's certainly what happened in the Soviet Union, and what happened in Maoist China, and what happened in Nazi Germany. There was nothing for the powerful to subordinate themselves to. You're supposed to be subordinate to God. What does that mean? We're going to tear that idea apart, but partly what that means is that you're subordinate  even if you're sovereign  to the principles of sovereignty itself. And then the question is, I would say we have been working that out for a very long period of time. That's one of the things that we'll talk about.. Marduk was a Mesopotamian deity, and imagine this is sort of what happened. As an empire grew out of the post-ice age  15,000 years ago, 10,000 years ago  all these tribes came together. These tribes each had their own deity  their own image of the ideal. But then they started to occupy the same territory. One tribe had God A, and one tribe had God B, and one could wipe the other one out, and then it would just be God A, who wins. That's not so good, because maybe you want to trade with those people, or maybe you don't want to lose half your population in a war. So then you have to have an argument about whose God is going to take priority  which ideal is going to take priority. What seems to happen is represented in mythology as a battle of the gods in celestial space. From a practical perspective, it's more like an ongoing dialog. You believe this; I believe this. You believe that; I believe this. How are we going to meld that together? You take God A, and you take God B, and maybe what you do is extract God C from them, and you say,  story: go out and wreak havoc on the dragon. He cuts her into pieces, and he makes the world out of her pieces. That's the world that human beings live in. The Mesopotamian emperor acted out Marduk. He was allowed to be emperor insofar as he was a good Marduk. That meant that he had eyes all the way around his head, and he could speak magic; he could speak properly. We are starting to understand, at that point, the essence of leadership. Because what's leadership? It's the capacity to see what the hell's in front of your face, and maybe in every direction, and maybe the capacity to use your language properly to transform chaos into order. God only knows how long it took the Mesopotamians to figure that out. The best they could do was dramatize it, but it's staggeringly brilliant. It's by no means obvious, and this chaos is a very strange thing. This is a chaos that God wrestled with at the beginning of time. Chaos is half psychological and half real. There's no other way to really describe it. Chaos is what you encounter when you're blown into pieces and thrown into deep confusion  when your world falls apart, when your dreams die, when you're betrayed. It's the chaos that emerges, and the chaos is everything it wants, and it's too much for you. That's for sure. It pulls you down into the underworld, and that's where the dragons are. All you've got at that point is your capacity to bloody well keep your eyes open, and to speak as carefully and as clearly as you can. Maybe, if you're lucky, you'll get through it that way and come out the other side. It's taken people a very long time to figure that out, and it looks, to me, that the idea is erected on the platform of our ancient ancestors, maybe tens of millions of years ago, because we seem to represent that which disturbs us deeply using the same system that we used to represent serpentile, or other, carnivorous predators. We're biological creatures. When we formulated our strange capacity to abstract and use language, we still had all those underlying systems that were there when we were only animals. We have to use those systems that are there. Part of the emotional and motivational architecture of our thinking, part of the reason why we can demonize our enemies who upset our axioms, is because we perceive them as if they're carnivorous predators. We do it with the same system. That's chaos itself, the thing that always threatens us  the snakes that came to the trees when we lived in them, like 60 million years ago. It's the same damned systems. with a head full of snakes. You turn to stone. You're paralyzed, and the reason you do that is because you're using the predator detector system to protect yourself. Your heart rate goes way up, and you get ready to move. Things that upset us rely on that system. The Marduk story, for example, is the idea that, if there are things that upset you  chaotic, terrible, serpentine, monstrous, underworld things that threaten you  the best thing to do is open your eyes, keep your speech organized, and go out, confront the thing, and make the world out of it. It's staggering. When I read that story and started to understand it, it just blew me away. It's such a profound idea, and we know it's true, too, because we know, in psychotherapy, that you're much better off to confront your fears head-on than you are to wait and let them find you. Partly what you do, if you're a psychotherapist, is you help people break their fears into little pieces  the things that upset them  and then to encounter them one by one and master them. You're teaching this process of internal mastery over the strange and chaotic world. All of that makes up some of the background. We haven't even gotten to the first sentence of the Biblical stories yet, but all of that makes up the background. We extracted this strange collection of stories, with all its errors and its repetitions and its peculiarities, out of the entire history that we've been able to collect ideas, and it's the best we've been able to do. I know there are other religious traditions. I'm not concerned about that at the moment because we can use this as an example. What I'm hoping is that we can return to the stories with an open mind and see if there is something there that we actually need. I hope that will be the case. As I've said, I'll approach it as rationally as I possibly can.. It's part of the capacity for human abstract thought. You can pull the representation of the behaviour away from the behaviour and manipulate the representation before you enact it. That's why you think, so that you can generate a pattern of action and test it out in a fictional world before you embody it and die because you're foolish. You let the representation die, not you. That's why you think, and that's partly what we're trying to do with these stories. What do I hope to accomplish? I hope to end this 12-lecture series knowing more than I did when I started. That's my goal, because I've said that I'm not telling you what I know; I'm trying to figure things out. This is part of the process by which I'm doing that, and so I'm doing my best to think on my feet. I come prepared, but I'm trying to stay on the edge of my capacity to generate knowledge, to make this continually clear, and to get to the bottom of things. That's what I hope to accomplish. It seems like people are interested in that, so we're going to try to accomplish that together. That's the plan.The idea is to see if there's something at the bottom of this amazing civilization that we've managed to structure, that I think is in peril, for a variety of reasons. Maybe, if we understand it a little bit better, we won't be so prone just to throw the damned thing away, which I think would be a big mistake. And to throw it away because of resentment, hatred, bitterness, historical ignorance, jealousy, the desire for destruction, and all of that...I don't want to go there. It's a bad idea, to go there. We need to be grounded better. All right, so how do I approach this? Well, first of all, I think in evolutionary terms. As far as I'm concerned, the cosmos is 15 billion years old; the world is 4.5 billion years old; there's been life for 3.5 billion years, and there are creatures that had pretty developed nervous systems 300 to 600 million years ago. We were living in trees as small mammals 60 million years ago, and we were down on the plains between 60 million and 7 million years ago, and that's about when we split from chimpanzees. Modern human beings seemed to emerge about 150,000 years ago, and civilization emerged pretty much after the ice age  something after 15,000 years ago. Not very long ago, at all. That's the span across which I want to understand. have nervous system properties that are very much like ours, and it's very much worth knowing that. I think in an evolutionary way. I think it's a grand and remarkable way to think, because it has this incredible time span. It's this amazing  I mean, people at the end of the 19th century, middle of the 19th century, really thought the world was about 6,000 years old. 15 billion years old is a lot more. It's a lot grander and bigger, but it's also a lot more frightening and alienating, in some sense, because the cosmos has become so vast. It's easy for human beings to think of themselves as trivial specs on a trivial spec out some misbegotten hellhole-end-of-the-galaxy among hundreds of millions of galaxies. It's very easy to see yourself as nothing in that span of time. That's a real challenge for people. I think it's a mistake to think that way, because I think consciousness is far more than we think it is. It's still something that we have to grapple with. I'm a psychoanalytic thinker. What that means is that I believe that people are collections of subpersonalities, and that those subpersonalities are alive, not machines. They have their viewpoint; they have their wants; they have their perceptions; they have their arguments; they have their emotions. They're like low resolution representations of you. When you get angry, it's like a very low resolution representation of you. It only wants rage, or it only wants something to eat, or it only wants water; it only wants sex. It's you, but shrunk and focused in a specific direction. All those motivational systems are very, very ancient, very archaic and very, very powerful. They play a determining role in the manner in which we manifest ourselves. As Freud pointed out with the id, we have to figure out how we take all those underlying animalistic motivations and emotions and civilize them in some way, so that we can all live in the same general territory without tearing each other to shreds, which is maybe the default position of both chimpanzee and humanity. So I take seriously the idea that we're a loose collection of spirits. It says in the Old Testament, somewhere, that the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. I think this is akin to that. If you know that you're not in control of yourself thoroughly, and that there are other factors behind the scenes  like the ancient Greeks, who thought that human beings were the playthings of the gods; that's the way they conceptualized the world. They sort of meant the same thing. They meant there are these great forces that move us, that we don't create, and that we're subordinate to, in some sense. Not entirely, but you can be subordinate to them, and they move our destinies. That was the Greek view. Understanding that teaches you humility, and that there's a hell of a lot more going on behind the scenes. You're the driver of a very complex vehicle, but you don't understand the vehicle very well, and it's got its own motivations and methods. Sometimes you think it's doing something, and it's doing something completely different. You see that in psychotherapy all the time, because you help someone unwind a pattern of behaviour that they've manifested forever. First of all, they describe it and they become aware of it, then, maybe, they start to see what the cause is. They have no idea why they were acting like that. They have to have the memory that produced the behavioural pattern to begin with. It has to be brought back to mind, then it has to be analyzed and assessed, and then they have to think of a different way of acting. It's extraordinarily complex. Literary...Well, there's this postmodern idea about literature  and about the world, for that matter  that, if you take a complex piece of literature like a Shakespeare play, there's no end to the number of interpretations that you can make of it. You can interpret each word, each phrase, each sentence, each paragraph. You can interpret the entire play. The way you interpret it depends on how many other books you've read, and it depends on your orientation in the world. It depends on a very, very large number of things  how cultured you are, or how much culture you lack. All of those things. It opens up a huge vista for potential interpretation. The postmodernists sort of stubbed their toe on that, and thought, Which is really a postmodern idea, and a very, very cynical one. It has its point, but the thing is grounded in something real.. This is one of the coolest things that I've ever seen. At the bottom here, every single one of those lines is a Biblical verse. The length of the line is proportional to how many times that verse is referred to in some way by some other verse. So this is the first hyperlinked book. I'm dead serious about that. You can't click and get the hyperlinks, obviously, but it's a thoroughly hyperlinked book. It's because the people who worked on these stories that are hypothetically at the end  which is the end; the end can't affect the beginning. That's the rule of time: what happens now can't affect what happened to you 10 years ago...even though it actually can...you reinterpret things, then they're not the same. But whatever. We won't get into that. Technically speaking, the present cannot effect the past. But that's not right, if you're looking at a piece of literature; because when you write the end you know what was at the beginning, and when you write the beginning  or edit it  you know what's at the end, and so you can weave the whole thing together. There's 65,000 cross-references, and that's what this map shows. That's a great visual representation of the book. Why is the book deep? Well, just imagine how many pathways you could take through that. You'd just journey through that forever. You'd never, ever get to the end of it. There's permutations and combinations, and every phrase is dependent on every other phrase, and every verse is dependent on every other verse...well, not entirely, but 65,000 is not a bad start. That's another issue that seems to make the postmodernist critique even more correct: how in the world are you going to extract out a canonical interpretation of something like that? It's like, it's not possible. But here is the issue, as far as I can tell: the postmodernists extended that critique to the world. They said, . It's anxiety-provoking and depressing  very hard on people. Even more than that, it turns out that the way we're constructed neurophysiologically is that we don't experience any positive emotion unless we have an aim and we can see ourselves progressing towards that aim. It isn't precisely attaining the aim that makes us happy  as you all know if you've ever attained anything. As soon as you attain it, the whole little game ends, and you have to come up with another game. So it's Sisyphus, and that's ok. But it does show that the attainment can't be the thing that drives you, because it collapses the game. That's what happens when you graduate from university. It's like, you're king of the mountain for one day, then you're like serf at Starbucks for the next five years. Human beings are weird creatures: we're much more activated by having an aim and moving towards it than we are by attaining it. What that means is that you have to have an aim, and that means you have to have an interpretation. It also means that the nobler the aim, the better your life. That's a really interesting thing to know, because you've heard, ever since you were tiny, that you should act like a good person  you shouldn't lie, for example. You might think, That's a great question. Why not do that? Why act morally if you can get away with something, and it brings you closer to something you want? Well, why not do it? These are good questions. It's not self-evident. It seems, to me, tied into what I just mentioned. You destabilize yourself and things become chaotic, and that's not good. If you do not have a noble aim, you have nothing but shallow trivial pleasures, and they don't sustain you. That's not good, because life is difficult. There's so much suffering and complexity. It ends, everyone dies, and it's painful. Without a noble aim, how can you withstand any of that? You can't; you become desperate. Things go from bad to worse very rapidly, when you become desperate. And so there's the idea of the noble aim, and it's something that's necessary. It's the bread that people cannot live without. It's not mystical bread: it's the noble aim. And what is that? It was encapsulated, in part, in the story of Marduk: it's to pay attention, speak properly, confront chaos, and to make a better world. It's something like that. That's enough of a noble aim so that you can stand up without cringing at the very thought of your own existence  so that you can do something that's worthwhile, to justify your wretched position on the planet. The literary issue is that you can interpret a text in a variety of ways, but that's not right. This is where the postmodernists went wrong. What you're looking for in a text  and in the world, for that matter  is sufficient order and direction. We have to think, You don't want to suffer so much that your life is unbearable. That just seems self-evident. Pain argues for itself. I think of pain as the fundamental reality, because no one disputes it. Even if you say that you don't believe in pain, it doesn't help when you're in pain. You still believe in it. You can't pry it up with logic and rationality. It just stands forth as the fundament of existence, and that's actually quite useful to know  to say you don't want any more of that than is absolutely necessary. I think that's self-evident. But then you say, Everyone knows exactly what that means. You have to act in a way that works now, and tomorrow, and next week, and next month, and so forth. So you have to take your future self into account. Human beings can do that. Taking your future self into account isn't much different than taking other people into account., and Homer downs a quart of mayonnaise and vodka. Marge says, It's so ridiculous and comical. But, ok, you see we have to grapple with that. The you that's out there in the future is sort of like another person, and so figuring out how to conduct yourself properly in relationship to your future self isn't much different than figuring out how to conduct yourself in relationship to other people. Then we can expand the constraints. Not only does the interpretation that you extract have to protect you from suffering and give you an aim, but it has to do it in a way that's iterable, so it works across time, and then it has to work in the presence of other people, so that you can cooperate with them and compete with them in a way that doesn't make you suffer more. People are not that tolerant. They have choices. They don't have to hang around with you; they can hang around with any one of these other primates. So if you don't act properly, at least within certain boundaries, you're just cast aside. People are broadcasting information at you, all the time, about how you need to interpret the world, so they can tolerate being around you. And you need that because, socially isolated, you're insane, and then you're dead. No one can tolerate being alone for any length of time. We can't retain our own sanity without continual feedback from other people. It's too damned complicated. You're constrained by your own existence, and then you're constrained by the existence of other people, and then you're also constrained by the world. If I read Hamlet and what I extracted out of that is the idea that I should jump off a bridge, it puts my interpretation to an end rather quickly. It doesn't seem to be optimally functional. An interpretation is constrained by the reality of the world. It's constrained by the reality of other people, and it's constrained by your reality across time. There's only a small number of interpretations that are going to work in that tightly defined space. That's part of the reason that postmodernists are wrong. It's also part of the reason, by the way, that AI people who are trying to make intelligent machines have had to put them in a body. It turns out that you just can't make something intelligent without it being embodied, and it's partly for the reasons that I've just described. You need constraints on the system, so that the system doesn't drown in an infinite sea of interpretation. It's something like that. So that's the literary end of it. Morality for me is about action. I'm an existentialist, in some sense, and what that means is that I believe that what people believe to be true is what they act out, not what they say. There's lots of definitions of truth. Truth is a very expansive word. You can think of objective truth, but behavioural truth is the same as objective truth. What you should do isn't the same as what is, as far as I can tell. People debate that, but I think the reason that has to be the case is because  think about it this way: You're standing in front of a field. You can see the field, but the field doesn't tell you how to walk through. There's an infinite number of ways you could walk through, and so you can't extract out an inviolable guide to how you should act from the array of facts that are in front of you. There's just too many facts, and you don't have directionality. But you need to know how not to suffer, and you need to know what your aim is, and so you need to overlay that objective reality with some interpretative structure. It's the nature of that interpretive structure that we're going to be aiming at hard. I've already given you some hints about it. We've extracted it in part from observations of our own behaviour and other people's behaviour, and we've extracted it in part by the nature of our embodiment, that's been shaped over hundreds of millions of years. We see the infinite plane of facts, and we impose a moral interpretation on it. The moral interpretation is what to do about what is. That's associated both with security  because you just don't need too much complexity  and also with aim. We're mobile creatures, and we need to know where we're going. All we're ever concerned about, roughly speaking, is where we're going. That's what we need to know: where we are we going, what we are doing, and why. That's not the same question as, That's the question of the ultimate ideal, in some sense. Even if you have trivial little fragmentary ideals, there's something trying to emerge out of that that's more coherent and more integrated and more applicable and more practical. And that's the other thing: you think about literature, and you think about art, and you think those aren't very tightly tied to the earth. They're empyrean, airy, spiritual, and they don't seem practical. But I'm a practical person. Part of the reason that I want to assess these books from a literary, aesthetic, and evolutionary perspective is to extract out something of value that's practical. One of the rules that I have when I'm lecturing is that I don't want to tell anybody anything that they can't use. I think of knowledge as a tool. It's something to implement in the world. We're tool-using creatures, and our knowledge is tools. We need tools to work in the world. We need tools to regulate our emotions, to make things better, to put an end to suffering to the degree that we can, to live with ourselves properly, and to stand up properly. You need the tools to do that. So I don't want to do anything in this lecture series that isn't practical. I want you to come away having things put together in a way that you can immediately apply. I'm not interested in abstraction for the sake of abstraction. It's gotta make sense, because the more restrictions on your theory, the better. I want it all laid out causally, so that B follows A and B precedes C. That way it's understandable and doesn't require any unnecessary leap of faith. Another thing that I think interferes with our relationship with a collection of books like the Bible is that you're called upon to believe things that no one can believe. That's no good, because that's a form of lie, as far as I can tell. Then you have to scrap the whole thing, because, in principle, the whole thing is about truth. If you have to start your pursuit of truth by swallowing a bunch of lies  how in the world are you going to get anywhere with that? I don't want any uncertainty at the bottom of this  or I don't want any more than I have to leave in it, because I can't get any farther than that. It's going to make sense rationally. Even though science is in flux, I don't want it to be pushing up against what we know to be scientifically untrue. That's something of a dangerous parameter. If it isn't working with evolutionary theory, for example, then I think that it's not a good enough solution.. Modern people think of reality as objective, and that's very powerful, but that isn't how we experience reality. We have our domain of experience  and this is a hard thing to get a grip on, even though it should be the most obvious thing. For the phenomenologists, everything that you experience is real. They're interested in the structure of your subjective experience. You have subjective experience, and you have subjective experience, and so do you, and there's commonalities across all of those. For example, you're likely to experience the same set of emotions. We've been able to identify canonical emotions, and, without canonical motivations, we couldn't even communicate, because you wouldn't know what the other person was like; you'd have to explain infinitely. There's nothing you could take for granted, but you can. Phenomenology is the fact that at the center of my vision my hands are clear, and out in the periphery they disappear. Phenomenology is the way things smell and the way things taste, and the fact that they matter. You could say, in some sense, that phenomenology is the study of what matters, rather than *"matter"*. It's a given, from the phenomenological perspective, that things have meaning. Even if you're a rationalist, a cynic, and a nihilist, and say nothing has any meaning, you still run into the problem of pain. Pain undercuts your arguments and has a meaning. There's no escaping from the meaning. You can pretty much demolish all the positive parts of it, but trying to think your way out of the negative parts...Good luck with that, because that just doesn't work. The Bible stories  and I think this is true of fiction in general  is phenomenological. It concentrates on trying to elucidate the nature of human experience. That is not the same as the objective world. It's also a form of truth, because it is true that you have a field of experience and that it is has qualities. The question is, what are the qualities? Ancient representations of reality were sort of a weird meld of observable phenomena  things we would consider objective facts  and the projection of subjective truth. I'll show you how the Mesopotamians viewed the world. They had a model of the world as a disc. If you go out in a field at night, what does the world look like? Well, it's a disc. It's got a dome on top of it. That was basically the Mesopotamian view of the world, and the view of the world of people who wrote the first stories in the Bible. There was water on top of the dome. Well, obviously. It rains, right? Where does the water come from? There's water around the dome. The disc is made of land, and then underneath that there's water. How do you know that? Well, drill. You'll hit water; it's under the earth. Otherwise, how would you hit the water? And then what's under that? Fresh water. And then what's under that? If you go to the edge of the disc, you hit the ocean. It's salt water. So it's a dome with water outside of it, and then it's a disc that the dome sits on, and then underneath that there's fresh water, and then underneath that there's salt water. That was roughly the Mesopotamian world. That's a mix of observation and imagination, because that isn't the world, but it is the way the world appears. It's a perfectly believable cosmology. The sun rises and the sun sets on that dome. It's not like the thing is bloody well spinning. Who would ever think that up? It's obvious that the sun comes up and goes down, and then travels underneath the world and comes back up again. There's nothing more self-evident than that. That's that strange intermingling of subjectively fantasy, right at the level of perception and actually observable phenomena. All of the cosmology that's associated with the Biblical stories is exactly like that: it's half psychology and half reality, although the psychological is real, as well., for example, as an alternative scientific theory. It's like, that just isn't going to go anywhere. The people who wrote these damned stories weren't scientists to begin with. There weren't any scientists back then  there's hardly any scientists, now. Really, it's hard to think scientifically. Man, it takes a lot of training, and even scientists don't think scientifically once you get them out of the lab, and hardly even when they're in the lab. You have to get peer-reviewed and criticized. It's hard to think scientifically. However, the people who wrote these stories thought more like how dramatists think  more like how Shakespeare thought  but that doesn't mean there isn't truth in it. It just means you have to be a little bit more sophisticated about your ideas of truth, and that's ok. There are truths to live by. Ok, fine. We want to figure out what those are, because we need to live and maybe not to suffer so much. And so if you know that what the Bible stories, and stories in general, are trying to represent is the structure of the lived experience of conscious individuals, you open up the possibility of a whole different realm of understanding. It eliminates the contradiction that's been painful for people, between the objective world and the claims of religious stories. Let's take a look at the structure of the book itself. The first thing about the Bible is that it's a comedy, and a comedy has a happy ending. That's a strange thing, because the Greek God stories were almost always tragic. The Bible is a comedy. It has a happy ending. Everyone lives, and there's a heaven. What you think about that is a completely different issue. I'm just telling you the structure of the story. It's something like, there was paradise at the beginning of time, and then some cataclysms occurred, and people fell into history. History is limitation, mortality, suffering, and self-consciousness. But there's a mode of being  or potentially the establishment of a state  that will transcend that, and that's what time is aiming at. That's the idea of the story.. and editors. What does that mean? Many people wrote it, there's many different books, and they're interwoven together  especially in the first five books by people who, I suspect, took the traditions of tribes that had been brought together under a single political organization and tried to make their accounts coherent. They took a little of this, and they took a little of that, and they took a little of this, and they tried not to lose anything, because it seemed valuable. It certainly seemed valuable to the people who collected the stories, because they weren't gonna tolerate too much editing. But they also wanted it to make sense, to some degree, so it wasn't completely logically contradictory and completely absurd. Many people wrote it, and many people edited it, and many people assembled it over a vast stretch of time. We have very few documents like that, and so just because we have a document like that is sufficient reason to look at it as a remarkable phenomena, and to try to understand what it is that it's trying to communicate. I said it's also the world's first hyperlinked text, which is very much worth thinking about, for quite a long time.. That's older than the very first book in the Bible, but they decided to put the newer version first. I think it's because it deals with more fundamental abstractions. It's something like that. It deals with the most basic of abstractions  how the universe was created  and then segues into what the human environment is like. That seems to be the logic behind it., and Exodus, and Numbers, along with the Priestly version. It also contains the law in the form  just the form  of the Ten Commandments, which is like a truncated form of the law. There's the Elohist source. It contains the stories of Abraham and Isaac. It's concerned with a heavenly hierarchy that includes angels. It talks about the departure from Egypt, and it presents the covenant code, which is this idea that society is predicated  this was Israeli society  on a covenant with God that's laid out in a sequence of rules, some of which are the Ten Commandment, but many of which are much more extensive than that. The final one is the Deuteronomist Code. It contains the bulk of the law and what's called the Deuteronomic History. It's independent of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers. And so we know that, at least. Now, there's debate about this, like there is about everything. I'm brushing over a large area of scholarship, but people generally assume that there were multiple authors over multiple periods of time. The way they've concluded that is by looking at textual analysis, trying to see where there are chunks of the stories that have the same kind of style or the same references. People argue about that because, you know, obviously it's difficult to recreate something ancient. But that's the basic idea. It is an amalgam of viewpoints about these initial issues, and that's important to know. It's like a collective story. in some backwoods part of the world  but is also something eternal that exists up outside of time and space, that was there right at the beginning. As far as I can tell, what that logos represents is something like what modern people refer to when they talk about consciousness. It's something like that  it's more than that. It's like consciousness and its capacity to be aware and to communicate. There's an idea underneath that which is that Being  especially from a phenomenological perspective, so the Being that is experience  cannot exist without consciousness. It's like consciousness shines a light on things to bring it into Being. Without consciousness, what is there? No one experiences anything. Is there anything, when no one experiences anything? That's the question, and the answer this book is presenting is that  Of course, it opens up what you mean by *"reality"*, but the reality that's being referred to here  I've told you already  is this strange amalgam of the subjective experience and the world. But the question is deeper than that, too, because it is by no means obvious what there is, if there's no one to experience it. The whole notion of time itself seems to collapse, at least in terms of something like felt duration. The notion of size disappears; there's nothing to scale it. Causality seems to vanish. We don't understand consciousness, not in the least. We don't understand what it is that is in us that gives illumination to Being. What happens in the Old Testament, at least in part, is that consciousness is associated with the divine. Now you think, That's a very complicated question, but at least we might note that there's something to the claim, because there is a miracle of experience and existence that's dependent on consciousness. People try to explain it away constantly, but it doesn't seem to work very well. And here's something else to think about  I think it's really worth thinking about. People do not like it when you treat them like they're not conscious. They react very badly to that. You don't like it if someone assumes that you're not conscious, and you don't like it if someone assumes you don't have free will  that you're just absolutely determined in your actions, there's nothing that's going to repair you, and that you don't need to have any responsibility for your actions. Our culture, the laws of our culture, are predicated on the idea that people are conscious. People have experience; people make decisions, and can be held responsible for them. There's a free will element to it. You can debate all that philosophically, and fine, but the point is that that is how we act, and that is the idea that our legal system is predicated on. There's something deep about it, because you're subject to the law, but the law is also limited by you, which is to say that in a well-functioning, properly-grounded democratic system, you have intrinsic value. That's the source of your rights. Even if you're a murderer, we have to say the law can only go so far because there's something about you that's divine. Well, what does that mean? Partly it means that there's something about you that's conscious and capable of communicating, like you're a whole world unto yourself. You have that to contribute to everyone else, and that's valuable. You can learn new things, transform the structure of society, and invent a new way of dealing with the world. You're capable of all that. It's an intrinsic part of you, and that's associated with the idea that there's something about the logos that is necessary for the absolute chaos of the reality beyond experience to manifest itself as reality. That's an amazing idea because it gives consciousness a constitutive role in the cosmos. You can debate that, but you can't just bloody well brush it off. First of all, we are the most complicated things there are, that we know of, by a massive amount. We're so complicated that it's unbelievable. So there's a lot of cosmos out there, but there's a lot of cosmos in here, too, and which one is greater is by no means obvious, unless you use something trivial, like relative size, which really isn't a very sophisticated approach.. That's the best investigation into that tactic that's ever been produced. What happens in Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment is that the main character, whose name is Raskolnikov, decides that there's no intrinsic value to other people and that, as a consequence, he can do whatever he wants. It's only cowardice that stops him from acting. Why would it be anything else if value of other people is just an arbitrary superstition? Well, then why can't I do exactly what I want, when I want? Which is the psychopath's viewpoint. Well, so Raskolnikov does: he kills someone who's a very horrible person, and he has very good reasons for killing her. He's half-starved, and a little bit insane, and possessed by this ideology  it's a brilliant, brilliant layout  and he finds out something after he kills her, which is that the post-killing Raskolnikov and the pre-killing Raskolnikov are not the same person, even a little bit, because he's broken a rule. He's broken a serious rule and there's no going back., he describes a political scenario that's not much different than the one we find ourselves in, now. There's these people who are possessed by rationalistic, utopian, atheistic ideas, and they're very powerful. They give rise to the communist revolution. They're powerful ideas.  His character, Stavrogin, also acts out the presupposition that human beings have no intrinsic nature and no intrinsic value. It's another brilliant investigation. Dostoevsky prophesized what will happen to a society if it goes down that road, and he was dead, exactly accurate. It's uncanny to read Dostoevsky's The Possessed  or The Devils, depending on the translation  and to read Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's Gulag Archipelago. One is fiction and prophecy, and the second is, It's quite remarkable. So the question is, do you contend seriously with the idea that, A, there's something cosmically constitutive about consciousness? and B, that that might well be considered divine? and C, that that is instantiated in every person? And then ask yourself  if you're not a criminal  if you don't act it out? And then ask yourself what that means. Is that reflective of a reality? Is it a metaphor? Maybe it's a complex metaphor that we have to use to organize our societies. It could well be. But even as a metaphor, it's true enough so that we mess with it at our peril. It also took people a very long time to figure out. This is Genesis 1, and I'm probably going to stop there because I believe it's 9:30. We didn't even get to the first line. for the next lecture. I'll just bounce through a collection of ideas that's associated with the notion of divinity. We'll turn back to the first lines when we start the next lecture. I have no idea how far I'm going to get through the Biblical stories, by the way, because I'm trying to figure this out as I go along.. There's the element of the Father, there's the element of the Son, and there's the element of the Holy Spirit. It's something like the spirit of tradition, human beings as the living incarnation of that tradition, and the spirit in people that makes relationship with the spirit and individuals possible. I'm going to bounce my way quickly through some of the classical, metaphorical attributes of God, so that we kind of have a cloud of notions about what we're talking about, when we return to Genesis 1 and talk about the God who spoke chaos into Being. There's a fatherly aspect, so here's what God as a father is like. You can enter into a covenant with it, so you can make a bargain with it. Now, you think about that. Money is like that, because money is a bargain you make with the future. We structured our world so that you can negotiate with the future. I don't think that we would have got to the point where we could do that without having this idea to begin with. You can act as if the future's a reality; there's a spirit of tradition that enables you to act as if the future is something that can be bargained with. That's why you make sacrifices. The sacrifices were acted out for a very long period of time, and now they're psychological. We know that you can sacrifice something valuable in the present and expect that you're negotiating with something that's representing the transcendent future. That's an amazing human discovery. No other creature can do that; to act as if the future is real; to know that you can bargain with reality itself, and that you can do it successfully. It's unbelievable. It responds to sacrifice. It answers prayers. I'm not saying that any of this is true, by the way. I'm just saying what the cloud of ideas represents. It punishes and rewards. It judges and forgives. It's not nature. One of the things weird about the Judeo-Christian tradition is that God and nature are not the same thing, at all. Whatever God is, partially manifest in this logos, is something that stands outside of nature. I think that's something like consciousness as abstracted from the natural world. It built Eden for mankind and then banished us for disobedience. It's too powerful to be touched. It granted free will. Distance from it is hell. Distance from it is death. It reveals itself in dogma and in mystical experience, and it's the law. That's sort of like the fatherly aspect. The son-like aspect. It speaks chaos into order. It slays dragons and feeds people with the remains. It finds gold. It rescues virgins. It is the body and blood of Christ. It is a tragic victim, scapegoat, and eternally triumphant redeemer simultaneously. It cares for the outcast. It dies and is reborn. It is the king of kings and hero of heroes. It's not the state, but is both the fulfillment and critic of the state. It dwells in the perfect house. It is aiming at paradise or heaven. It can rescue from hell. It cares for the outcast. It is the foundation and the cornerstone that was rejected. It is the spirit of the law. The spirit-like aspect. It's akin to the human soul. It's the prophetic voice. It's the still, small voice of conscience. It's the spoken truth. It's called forth by music. It is the enemy of deceit, arrogance, and resentment. It is the water of life. It burns without consuming. It's a blinding light. That's a very well-developed set of poetic metaphors. These are all...what would you say...glimpses of the transcendent ideal. That's the right way of thinking about it. They're glimpses of the transcendent ideal, and all of them have a specific meaning. In part, what we're going to do is go over that meaning, as we continue with this series. What we've got now is a brief description, at least, of what this is. We know it's associated with the logos in this sequence of stories. We know it's associated with the word, and with consciousness; and we know that it's associated with whatever God is. And then I laid out the metaphorical landscape that, at least in part, describes God. Now we have some sense of the being that creates the heavens and the earth.  that's that chaotic state of intermingled confusion  *"and darkness was over the face of the deep. And the spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters. And God said, let there be light, and there was light"*. We'll stop with that, because now we're ready to take a tentative step into the very first part of this book. It's important to have your conceptual framework properly organized, so that you can appreciate where it's going and what it might possibly mean. And so, well, I've done what I can today to….what would you say…elaborate on this single word, I suppose. Hah. But it's a big word, so it's not so unreasonable that it takes a long time to get to the point where you have any sense of what it means, at all. That is nowhere near…that is not…I thought I would get a lot farther than that. Hah. Thank you very much. So we do have time for some questions we have to be out of here at 10:30 it's 9:30 so maybe we'll have questions until kind of someone crazy grubs microphone and or maybe we'll have questions for half an hour something like that and so if anybody has any questions then there's a microphone there and there's a microphone there and I'll try to answer them to the best that I can mister my ability so let's sure let's start. Okay, so you talked about the idea of when you're confronting something that you fear you like you face it head-on and you you destroy it but then you said that that is when you're confronting something you make the world out of it and I was wondering if you could just I mean they expound me that means. You make your marriage out of the arguments okay you know you have arguments with your wife you have arguments with your children that's that chaotic state because no one's being able to formulate a habitable order from that that domain of controversy and confusion and then through dialogue you erect the structure that's a house that you can both live in and so that's the that's the idea of making the world out of that chaos and it's it's frightening because you know if you're really happened this is why people often avoid having disputes with people they love because it's frightening right you find out what the person's like and you find out what you're like it's like God who wants to do that nobody and so you know your heart rate goes up and it's confrontation and conflict and and that's because you're encountering that domain that hasn't been properly mapped or considered and so and you're doing that with your predator detection systems essentially and so that chaos that the threat is the stability say of the marriage is equivalent to well it's equivalent to the serpent in the tree that's one form of equivalence and then by dialogue through dialogue and negotiation you formulate the problem what exactly is going on here where exactly are we what exactly is the problem and so you keep talking until you reach a consensus when you can live with one that you can act out right and then you then maybe you come up with a solution to the problem and you've established peace again in peace that's the house that you can both live in and that's the chaos that's the chaos that people can fall into all the time and often do and it's the chaos that makes a marriage wash up on the shores and transform into like you know 50-year divorce court very horrible thing so that's the idea. okay Okay, thank you. Okay. Hi, Dr. Peterson, thank you so much for the talk and thanks for your teachings it's really helped me a lot of how to experience in grad school to English degrees and the way you describe to the humanities in my experience helped me understand my experience back then so thank you so that's too bad next too bad did that happen communicate really like that you know it's really not good but you don't have to tell me that, but you know I survived and I learned a lot and you know I'm not you know ungrateful for my experience I've learned a lot but you said something you described a Bible the collection of stories in the Bible interesting way and I wonder if it was on purpose you described it as created by an assembly of stories created by many people over time the type of length into itself and it sounds a lot like how a description of like the Internet and like how that works. yeah well it's not it's not accidental I mean because the Internet's also a collective it's a collective endeavor god only knows what personality it's going to manifest you know but it's going to manifest some personality because it's learning to understand us very very rapidly so I think you could there's no reason not to think about it as a precursor I mean the distance between the Bible and the Internet is a lot less than the distance between a chimpanzee as a human being so and the difference between a book and the Internet is it's also it's in some sense it's a matter of matter of degree rather than kind so I can't speculate you know because god only knows what's going to happen in the next 20 years I certainly don't and so I don't know what the preconditions are for consciousness I have no idea and I don't think anybody knows so I guess we're going to find out. Hey Dr. Peterson, I'm curious about the connection between aesthetic beauty and religious experience I think you've hinted at it once or twice over the courses lecture is it possible for something that's incredibly beautiful to evoke a religious or mystical experience or something in the same ballpark. I think that's what they're for yeah not a chance. no I mean if you look at the doctor of like like a Renaissance Cathedral you know II was just gonna write right off. my my tag on till I apologize me to drop my tag on that question the next part was um is that why we have cathedrals built like a spectacular buildings as a book yeah well it's Oxford. right well it's if you're going to house the ultimate ideal you build something beautiful right to to represent its dwelling place and it should be beautiful and this is something that people do not take seriously and this is especially something we don't take seriously in Canada I mean one of you think about you think about all the hundreds of millions of dollars that were invested into beauty in Europe in the spectacular excessive investment in beauty that's paid back god only knows how many multiples of times people make pilgrimages to Europe constantly because it's so beautiful that it just it staggers you Beauty is so valuable and we're so afraid of it and I think we're afraid of it because it does it's a pathway it's not the only pathway to the divine I mean there's a lot there's pathways to the divine love is one of them I suppose but beauty especially for people who have an affinity four beauties it's like music it's one of those things that you can't argue against right you can't even understand it just hits you and and it does it shows you well it shows you the ideal that's one way of thinking about it but it also shows you I think it's like a vision of the potential future it's something like that as well that if we just got our act together and and beautified things that that's the place that we can inhabit and that would in noble us and that's why this Jerusalem heavily City is paved with gemstones you know their crystalline the emit light and yeah it's the proper dwelling place for an enlightened consciousness beauty is the proper dwelling place for an enlightened consciousness and we we ignore it at our spiritual and economic peril it's like it's obvious that beauty there's almost nothing more valuable than beauty economically practically right so yeah why that is I mean I don't it's very who knows you know I mean why we we experience gemstones for example as beautiful it's very mysterious but there are deep reasons for it so yeah Hi. I have a bit of a similar question actually um I know what one of the ways in which the Bible is appreciated even by you some of its harshest critics and deeply atheistic people is as a work of literature and n is something I'm at least the King James or the authorized translation the Bible is something very aesthetically beautiful and a great work of literature and a great work of poetry and I'm wondering just from your study of it and from your personal perspective if there's any any particular passages or our parts of it do you find particularly I have struck you in that way or that you do cherish more than more than any others because you be able to share. well the ones that have really open the ones that have really opened up to me I think are the stories in Genesis right up to the Tower of Babel because I think well and hopefully I'll be able to talk to all of you about that but I think I got some sense of what they mean and why I mean I know it's not exhaustive and obviously but like and then there Nestorian Exodus as well I so filled it like I've got a handle on that and so those of those have hit me really really hard and that you know I mean just trying to understand this first part of Genesis to try to understand what these concepts mean has been especially when I started to understand that the concept that human beings are made in God's image at God it has all those attributes that we just described but human beings are made in God's image that that's actually the cornerstone of our legal system not really that really rattled me because I didn't understand that clearly that our body of laws has that metaphysical presupposition without which the laws fall apart and that's starting to happen it really is you know like the postmodern critique of law the law schools are I would say they're overrun by post modernists who are undermining the structure of Western law as fast as they possibly can because they don't buy any of this and so they're much more likely to just think of the law as something like a like a casual pragmatic tool to be manipulated for the purposes of bringing forth the Utopia it's a really really really bad idea so it's very strange to me that we go off track when metaphysical foundation starts to get rattled. so do you think your your appreciation of the aesthetic studium it comes from a belief in like the truth of its underlying propositions I mean that because like even the atheistic critics I'm thinking of like like even Dawkins or kitchens really appreciate the Bible it has just a piece of really beautiful literature and I guess the quality of their writing and certain exalted themes behind it even if they totally reject the underlying premise of it you seem to yeah well I don't think that you can see it as beautiful and poetic with the end reject the underlying premises because if you see it as beautiful and poetic you're accepting the underlying premises with your experience of the beauty and the poetics even though you may be maybe fighting it with your articulated rationality so I think all that indicates is a dis integrated perspective on the book and I'm not it's not surprising that that's the case I mean it's the perspective that everyone has on the book except with them it's more well developed and well thought through but I think it's fundamental they're not approaching the thing with enough respect that's my senses they and who knows right because I don't I don't know but what I've tried to do is to think there's probably more to this than I know and then try to understand it from that perspective rather than to think for example well it's a collection of superstitions that we've somehow outgrown it's like no it's just sorry that's that's not a deep enough analysis because it's got some truth but it doesn't take into account the fact that the proposition still stand at the foundation of our culture it doesn't address Nietzsche's central concern which is that if you blow out the notion of God the entire structure crumbles you know on you can debate that fine but I just you know just assume that you debated it with Nietzsche because he's a pretty tough customer to tangle with so I don't think that the Atheist types insofar as there's a type I don't think they've wrestled with the real problems So, I appreciate you set up some ground rules keep things rational and I think that's going to help us what I'm wondering is so for instance you said elsewhere the New Testament from the best from what you can see it's psychologically correct and that's you know quite astounding I would say there's a lot of truth and in in your depictions of these stories elsewhere you've pointed out like deep truths you know they're real powerful so what my question would be is if we can say Nietzsche took a like an order of magnitude of you know intelligence and you know depth to be able to predict what would happen in the next century you know rationally if the Bible is not the inerrant Word of God what's going on. that's a good question that's a really good question I mean I'm going to try to answer that rationally but but and as we move forward but as I said I don't want to leave people with the notion because you know some ways it's something I've thought about what I've been thinking about for a long time is I can't tell if I'm a like an advocate of the religious viewpoint or its worst possible critic because I am doing my best to make it rational and there's a reductionistic element to that but I think that I'm doing that while also leaving the door open to things that I don't understand because I know that there's there's more to this story than I understand or can understand and I'm laying out what I can understand and I'm making it rational but I do not believe for an instant that that exhausts the realm it's like there are ways of interpreting these stories that work in the conceptual universe we inhabit right now but there's a lot of things that we don't understand and what I'm the thing I've found about digging into these stories is that the deeper you dig the more you find and that's pretty damaged that's one of the things that convinced me that there was more to them that I had originally suspected because things would click and I think wow that's true that's really something and then I would take it apart further and I think whole well I thought that was something but this is this is even more remarkable it just keeps opening and opening and so I'm going to make it so I'm going to try to provide an answer to and it is I think you're right about speaking about Nietzsche and his capacity for prophecy and Dostoyevsky's in the same category like there are prophetic elements to the old and new Testament that seemed to stretch over much vaster spans of time and I'm going to try to produce a rational account of that but it mean one of the reasons that I think the New Testament is psychologically true let's say is because and this is one of the things that's that's that's deeply embedded in the structure of the Bible in the Old Testament there's this idea of I'm skipping ahead that through a succession of states the people who behave properly will eventually establish the proper state and so the state is viewed in some sense as the of the entity of salvation but what happens in the New Testament is that idea gets you could say deconstructed and instead of a state being the place of redemption a state of being becomes the state of redemption and so the idea that human beings will be redeemed moves from a utopian state vision to the responsibility of the individual and I think that's correct I mean I believe that that's the right answer and I think that the West in particular is predicated on idea that idea because it makes the state subservient to the individual I mean as a is what a dialog continual dialogue but in the final analysis the locus of the divine is the individual not the state and I believe that that's so true that if we don't act it out and believe it then we all die painfully and that's true enough for me. Thank you for the illuminating talk. I'm going to keep you on the creation story and if you don't mind because we know the editing that was done there was the purpose for the editing can you give us your thoughts about the difference in the story of creation especially pertaining to men from the first chapter which is very godlike you know by a word and to the second one which is more like a fatherly type of creation is it the selling point what was the reason for this type of editing to put the two together why not well. I think you know the more cynical would call critic criticisms of the Bible and the religious tradition criticisms like Marx's or Freud's even for that matter make the case that it's a power it's a manifestation of power in politics and and that there's always a political or economic motivation behind the construction of the stories and I think that that's true to some degree but I don't think that it's true enough so that you can take that particular interpretive tack and be done with it and I would say that to the degree that there are political and economic motivations that have shaped the stories the fact that multiple stories have come together they're sort of corrective in some sense and so even at the level of detail there's political intrigue and politics say with regards to the ascendancy of Israel when you step away from it it becomes something that's more Universal and escapes from that and how that happened I don't know I mean I think it's safe to say it's reasonably safe to say that the people who put this document together they did two things I think they were guided by their aesthetic taste and their conscience I truly believe that and the reason I believe that is because I think anything that was propagandistic would have been forgotten and he can't remember propaganda no one likes it it's like it's dead ten years after you write over 20 years and it isn't only that these books were assembled in written it was that they were preserved and remembered and to me that means they have enough entity with the structure of memory I mean you think about how does this story last 10,000 years unless it's the kind of story you can remember it doesn't because you forget all the forgettable stuff and all you remember is the memorable stuff and so there's this there's this interplay between the document itself and its audience that shapes the document and so now I don't know how specifically I answered your question we're going to hit the different stories as they come up in sequence and I think I'll shed some more light on the relationship between them I'm doing that and we'll start with that next week. Right, so I've been really interested in a lot of the stuff that you've been saying about dreams because I've been lucid dreaming a lot for many years but always in a sort of atheistic way it's sort of like a game or something like that but because of seeing your talk and everything I've started to think of it from a different perspective like you're now interfacing with something beyond the narrow scope of your conscious awareness that or something like that maybe mythological or maybe something like God and so what I've been thinking about and what it may be wonder what you think about it is that in some way is when you're lucid dreaming you're kind of Trent you're getting beyond lived in limitations of an ordinary dream you're sort of transcending limitations which maybe is like it's not the purpose of people right is it because as a person you're supposed to be limited in some way as opposed to like God Ruiz like not limited and how but on the other hand it's a good opportunity to kind of have control over your interactions with this like very special and like interesting thing so I guess the conundrum is that on one hand like you can you can control your interactions but on the other hand like you are controlling them so I guess I'm wondering what you think about that and also just in general what do you think about lucid dreaming is a thing like should you do it or I had a client who could really lucid dream you know and one of the things she used them now and then to solve problems even though she didn't always pay attention to the answer sometimes she did she wanted her in one of her dreams one of the characters told her that she would have to learn to live in a slaughterhouse she was very afraid of life and one of the consequences of that was that we went watched an embalming so so the dreams were but one of the things she did she'd asked the characters what they were up to you know she was instead of controlling she would inquire and so but I don't know what to say about lucid dreaming beyond that like I know it's a well-documented phenomena and many people can do it and women seem to be able to do it better than men that's what the research indicates but I think that what we don't know about lucid dreaming could fill a lot of books so I think you do there is some danger in controlling it I think because you lose the spontaneous revelation although not completely because you can't control it completely but I like see you might be interested in reading Jung's works on active imagination because he kind of learned to dream when he was awake and he spent a lot of time in the world of imagination when he was awake the red books for example the red book is a document of his experiences with awake dreaming but he was very interactive with the dream you know instead of trying to bend it to his grandma's will he was he was exploring it in some sense like you'd explore a videogame you know which are forms of Dreams in and of themselves so yeah I would say do it with an exploratory purpose in mind you could always ask yourself what you could learn too which is a very dangerous question to ask a dream because sometimes you'll find out what you have to learn that's not so pleasant but it's really worthwhile. I think I'm going to take four more questions only because I'm running out of brains and I don't want to say stupid things  or stupider things than I've already said. Thank you for the talk. In the beginning of your lecture you talked about how society needed this kind of dreamlike religious base so we don't go between left and right violently and we can kind of have this base and then you also said you admired Nietzsche for kind of chopping down these these ideological and kind of dogmatic weeds coming up from the base of Christianity I was wondering how what your thoughts are on how society can have this kind of religious base without having these kind of dangerous ideologies that can spring up once in a while. That's what I'm trying to figure out no really I mean that really that's the serious answer to that question you know I mean the reason that I'm an admirer of Nietzsche is because he was the spirit of his time so that's a good way of thinking about it it's not like Nietzsche killed God it's that Nietzsche gathered what was in the air and articulated it right incredibly profoundly and so he put his finger on the spot and now in doing so he announced the problem and once you announced the problem then maybe you can come up with a solution because you can't solve a problem unless you know what it is and the fact that he made it so stark and so clear is horrifying in some sense but at least we know where we stand and so since then I would say particularly with in many ways particularly with the work of yoga and everything that's come out of that which is a deeper study of mythology and its meanings and we've been trying to address that the issue that needs you brought up and trying to solve the problem the problem is something like the reunification of the spirit of mankind it's something like that well we're slogging through it man and that's that's that that's why you're all here at least in part so we'll see how far we can get by at this rate we'll get to like the 12th verse in the first yeah but that same you know. yes they'll be in they'll be in the video I could also make them available add slides yeah well that's okay I'll return to this when we when we get going again so oh yeah different colors represent the distance between the between the cross references yeah well there I'll talk about that more next time I mean I think that the best answer to that is I'll talk more about that next time I mean I think of them as overlapping metaphorical domains you know in the descriptions I put of the fatherly aspect that some aspect in the spirit aspect you can swap a lot of those you know it's kind of arbitrary but I think they're I think the trinitarian idea is trying to get forward the notion that the locus of the divine is is it's the same thing in its essence but it exists in a multiplicity it exists as the spirit of tradition it exists as the living individual in the end time and space and then it it exists as the spirit that well and as consciousness something like that that we all share which which you know you would have thought about that is something like the capacity for the individual to realize that tragedy and redemption of Christ in their individual life and that's something like your capacity to voluntarily accept the tragic conditions of your existence and to move forward to something resembling paradise regardless of that you know as something that's intrinsic to you and I think that's associated with the idea of the Pentecost and and and the Holy Spirit all of that it's it's so that's as good as I can do in a short of time so yep I think it's because it's because of the gap between what we articulate and what we don't know something has to fill that gap like I think the law could be could could replace it if the law was total but it isn't it's it's bounded and incorrect and there's something arrests it has to rest on something inside that's like this mediator between what we articulate and what we don't understand it's something like custom it's something like expectation it's something like the intrinsic sense of justice you know that the law itself is aiming at and those aren't fully articulated but without them there'd be no grounding like without the body the law would be a dictionary you know and if you don't know what a word means using the dictionary is helpful but not that helpful because like unless you've had the experience of anger the dictionary can't tell you what anger means it's just refers to other words but the words themselves refer to something else and the law refers to something else and without that it has to be in tune with that something else and has to be in accordance with it and so I I don't think we can ever delineate the proper body of laws and that's also why you like ideological utopias see the unity illogical utopia is dispensed with the transcendent they say this is what we need to do it's like no you don't know that's not good you have to leave space for what you kind of know and for what you don't know and I mean you know in the story of the Tower of Babel human beings make this massive building that's supposed to reach up to the heavens so that it'll take the place of God well that's that's the earliest warning we have of the danger of making things so big that you confuse them with God and God gets irritated and comes down and makes everybody speak four languages and scatters them it's like well that's what happens when you try to make something a totality is that it starts to fragment inside and and disintegrates into catastrophe and so it's almost as if we have to maintain this articulated space inside the dream inside the custom something like that because otherwise it doesn't work and I think that's the same as having respect for the fact that we have bodies you know we're not just abstract creatures that follow rules we're not that at all we only follow certain rules we won't follow the other ones and our societies will crumble and so and we just don't know enough to articulate the entire landscape of behavior with articulated rules not at all we can't do it it's beyond us yeah yeah okay thanks for the talk my question is also about dreams you spoke about dreams as like a representation of truths and universal truths that can be interpreted into like myths and and religion and as as you say it's very beneficial for the individual and it sounds like also for for the society as well because not everyone can as easily remember their dreams or interpret their dreams like that and also it's it's like broadcasted to to all of society for their benefit so I guess I'm wondering what the evolutionary advantage of dreams are and my question would be do you think that dreams suggest some sort of evolutionary group selection so should I like groups that don't have these dreams that are represented into myths and religion do you think they they didn't survive as well okay so I'm not going to answer the second part of that question because I'd have to go far too far off at a tangent for me to manage right now but I can answer the first part I mean what happens when you're dreaming there's a little switch so to speak in your brain that shuts off when you're dreaming and it stops you from moving right it shuts everything except your eyes because who you know if you're moving your eyes back and forth is not going to get run around and get eaten by a lion it's okay to move your eyes but the rest of you is stand exactly where it is then you can run these simulations and so what's happening at night and this is a fairly well accepted theory of dreaming we know that dreams update memories and help consolidate memories they also help you forget but what seems to be happening at night is that you're you're running the underlying architecture of your cognitive ability in different simulations babbling on its cost-free because you're you're paralyzed you don't running around they're out in the world investigating so it's part of the manner in which your brain experiments with the way the world can be represented and so and it seems absolutely necessary and I mean if you deprive people of REM sleep they don't stay sane very long there's something necessary about the Dreaming process to maintenance of the of articulated sanity so you're doing some kind of organization at night when you descend into that chaos and partly what seems to happen is that your categorical you know your categories have boundaries right sometimes you don't have the categories correct and so the boundaries have to loosen and other things need to be put into categories or some things shunted away and in the dream the category structure loosens which is why dreams are so peculiar but they're experimenting it's your mind is experimenting with the underlying categorical structure of imagination and trying to update your your mode of being in the world dreams often concentrate on things that provoke anxiety so if you wake people up when they're dreaming the most commonly reported emotion is anxiety and so the dream is like the first stages of the attempt to contend with the unknown and so the dream is half unknown and half known which is also why it's so peculiar you know because you kind of understand it but you don't really and it partakes up the unknown and of the known and it's the bridge between the two something like that so okay so my question is kind of two parts the first one is just like a general question and then just the application of the question so my first question is do you think that consciousness and being hood are in extra inextricably linked and then secondly so if there was something like a supercomputer that one could house theoretically a perfect brain of a person in it does that thing then become the same person as the person who is before so is there a transcendency to being good but not too conscious okay so the first question is well I would say that the kind of being that these stories are concerned with is absolutely dependent on consciousness now whether or not that means that being as such is dependent on consciousness actually depends on how you define being right so it's always tricky when you ask and it is a an instant an example of B those are tricky questions because it depends on how you define the two but for our purposes the being that we're discussing that's represented in these stories is intrinsically associated with conscious experience and consciousness has given this constitutive role it says that the experience that we're talking about would not exist if consciousness did not exist so you can think about it as a kind of game in a way and then you have to decide for yourself whether that's a game that can be generalized and I won't answer the second part okay if you don't mind all right so two-part question first ones very quick almost admin if we want to read the biblical stories that kind of be referring to as a particular version edition source publisher we should refer to all bring the thing I like next week which is a I think the Reader's Digest published it of all things but it's a it lays out the narratives in a different format it's easy I find it much easier to read so I'll show it to you and I'll bring it next time and show it to you one of the main reasons I'm interested in so much of your work and I think many people are as well as that you kind of leave literalism at the door and you open up another door to a much more deeper meaning in your interview with transluminal media you mentioned disciples book the serpent the treatise yeah yeah and envision and you note that we as a species are very good at recognizing camouflage patterns of snakes particularly in the lower field of vision and you further note that visual acuity is correlated with that and that it co-evolved and you summarize thusly by saying the following down paraphrasing you say what gives you vision snakes - that's what it says in Genesis what else gives you vision fruit that's also right that's why we have color vision what makes you self-conscious fear man woman that's Eve and so I understand at the elementary level some of the concepts that you have about representations dreams abstractions etc but kind of raises the question for me you know I'm not accusing of any creationism or literalism yeah you know what's your point why did you make that connection what's the meaning of the story of Genesis visa vie Liz eigvals book no problem we're gonna as soon as I get past this first Genesis one we're going to we're going to hit that hard so so well hardly yes I'm suggesting that it foreshadowed it and and I think they're the same thing I mean is Beldon her books plays with that idea metaphorically but she never really takes it seriously which is no problem I mean there's only so much you could take seriously and she did a fine job of what you did but I'll talk about that a lot because it's a very complicated issue I mean I would say to begin with it that the systems that you use to deal with radical uncertainty are the same systems that your primate ancestors evolved to deal with snakes that's a good start so okay okay one more and then we're done I'm an aerospace science engineer and an expert computer programmer and I have three rapid-fire questions so I'm going to get through them quick based on your opinion of where the universities now stand in terms of humanities and social sciences it's mathematics more powerful than articulated speech I'm not sure I'm not exactly sure how the first oh well it depends on what you mean by power I guess I mean obviously studying mathematics and computer science makes you insanely powerful the question is to what end and I don't think that you can extract an answer to that from the study of mathematics the humanities are there to ground people in proper citizen hood that's that's a way of thinking about it and so yes it makes you powerful but then the question is who has the power because it might not be you it might be the mathematics so to speak you know because you never know what you're an agent of precisely and so yeah well look I've got nothing against computer programmers I mean more power to you guys and mathematicians as well but that yes and it has to be a truth right it has to be a tool of something and what the humanities were forward to Tate was to tell people what the tools should be used for and so the tools themselves are easily powerful but that's that's not necessarily you know untrammeled good so I have to stop because okay quick already want to answer this question okay okay you were in this I guess one room in a museum in New York dancing some original Renaissance artwork masterpiece yeah these are generally accepted as amazing artifacts okay does an original work of art as opposed to a high fidelity reproduction contained the spirit of the artist who created it and does this account for the disparity and how much you'd have to pay for it does in part I'm going to a good portrait artist II and one of the things he pointed out about a great portrait is that it actually contains time so you know because the photograph is one instant but a portrait is you layered on you layered on you late so it's got a thickness you know and I think you can see that thickness in the original but it's also a direct manifestation of that creative active perception I don't think you get that you just can't get the fidelity of the original with the reproduction but there's more to it than that too because the painting doesn't end with the frame you know like we tend to think of the painting itself as the object but but most objects are are densely innervated with hist with historical context and you can say well the historical context isn't the object but it depends on what you mean by the object and often people when they buy a piece of a painting are buying the historical context and you just don't get that with the reproduction it's a kind of magic it's like you want to have Elvis Presley's guitar or another guitar just like it well you want to have Elvis's guitar that's why you can't tell it's all of us as guitar by looking at it well it is at the level of detail but not at the level of context that's how it looks to me okay we got to go. Thank you. okay well I thought this time that I would actually cover some of the biblical stories so and hopefully a number of them as I said last time I'm going to go through this while as fast as I am able to I want to do it as completed job as possible and of course the probability that I'll get through the entire Bible is very low but we'll get through a lot of the major stories in the beginning of it and that's a good start and then you know assuming that this all goes well then maybe I'll try to do the same thing again either in the fall or next year so assuming I'm that everything is still working out properly next year it's a long ways away all right so I guess we'll start so last week I talked to you about a line in the New Testament that was from John and it was a line that was designed to parallel the opening of Genesis and it's it's a really important line and I thought I would re-emphasize it because the Bible is a book that's been written forward and backwards in time in some sense like most books because if you write a book of course when you get to the end if you're the writer you can adjust the beginning and so on so it has this odd it has this appearance of linearity but it really it isn't linear it's like you're God in some sense standing outside of time that's your book and you can play with time anywhere along it and the people who put the book together or the books together took full advantage of that and and and that makes the story it gives the story odd parallels in in many many places in a very large number of places and this is one of the major parallels at least from the perspective of the Christian interpretation of the Bible which of course includes the New Testament and so there's this strange idea that Christ was the same factor or force that God used at the beginning of time to speak habitable order into being and that's a very very strange idea you know it's not it's not something that can be just easily dismissed as superstition partly because it's so strange it doesn't it doesn't even fit the definition of like a superstitious belief it's it's a dreamlike belief in some sense and what I what I see many of the ideas in the Bible as is is these dreamlike ideas that that under not lie are our normative cognition and that constitute the ground from which are more articulate articulated and and explicit ideas have emerged and this one's so complicated this idea is so complicated that it's still mostly embedded in dreamlike form but it seems to have something to do with the primacy of consciousness and this is one of the biggest issues regarding the structure of reality as far as I can tell because everyone from physicists to neurobiologists debates this there's there's the the stumbling block for a purely objective view of the world seems to me to be consciousness and consciousness has all sorts of strange properties for example it isn't obvious what constitutes time or at least duration in the absence of consciousness and it isn't also easy to understand what constitutes being in the absence of consciousness because it seems to be the case well if a movie is running and there's no one to watch it I know it sounds like the tree and the forest idea but it's it's not that idea at all if a movie is watching is running and no one's watching it in what sense is can you say that there's even a movie running because the movie seems to be the experience of the movie not the objective elements of the movie and there's something about the world at least insofar as we're in it as human beings that is dependent on conscious experience of the world now of course you can take consciousness out of the world and say well if none of us were here if there was no such thing at consciousness then the cosmos would continue running the way it is running but of course it depends on what exactly you mean by the cosmos when you make a statement like that because there's something about the subjective perience of reality that gives it reality or at least that's one way of looking at it and since we're all pretty enamored of our own consciousness as although they're painful because they define our being it's not unreasonable to give consciousness a kind of metaphysical primacy now and it's deeper than that you know deeper idea than that because there are physicists and they're not trivial physicists like like John Wheeler who believes that in some sense consciousness plays a constitutive role in transforming the chaotic potential of being into the actuality of being he actually thinks about it he's not alive anymore but he actually thought about it as as playing a constitutive role you know and then from the neurobiological perspective or from the scientific perspective it's not consciousness is not something we understand I don't think we understand it at all it's something we can't get a handle on with our fundamental materialist philosophy and I don't know why that is it's quite frustrating if you're a scientist but it isn't clear to me that we've made any progress whatsoever in understanding consciousness even though what we've been trying to understand it for hundreds of years and even though psychologists and neurobiologist and so forth have really like put a lot of effort into understanding consciousness from a scientific perspective in the last 50 years so anyways what it seems to me is the idea that that God used the word to to extract order out of habitable order out of chaos at the beginning of time which is roughly the right way of thinking about it seems to me deeply allied with the idea that what it is that we do as human beings is is encounter something like a formless and potential chaos I mean we're not omniscient obviously and we can't just do whatever we want but we encounter a formless and chaotic potential that's always what we're grappling with and somehow we use our consciousness to give that form and this is how people act like if you look at how they regard themselves it's how they act because you say things to people like well you should live up to your potential when you make a case that there's something about a person that's more than what is that yet could be if only they participated in the process properly and everyone knows what that means and no one acts like a mystery has been uttered when you say that and you know you can see a situation in your own life that's full of potential you're often extremely excited when you encounter something that's full of potential because what you see is something that could be you see a future beckoning for you that could be if only you interacted with it properly and it activates your nervous system right in a very basic way and we even understand how that happens to the degree that we understand how the nervous system works because the systems that mediate positive emotion which are governed roughly by dopa by the neurochemical dopamine and which have their roots way down in the ancient hypothalamus a very very archaic and and fundamental part of the brain it that responds to potential which is the possibility of accruing something new and valuable it responds to potential with active movement forward and engagement and so we're engaged in the world as potential and looks like consciousness does that and so there's this idea that this is the main idea that I think is being put forth in Genesis one it's something like and you see this in mythology like from from what I've been able to gather there's always three causal elements that make up being at the bottom of world mythology and one is the formless potential that makes up being once it's interacted with and that's generally given a feminine nature and I think that's because it's like the source from which all things emerge and rise it's something like that it's more complicated than that but it's something like that and then there's some kind of interpretive structure that has to grapple with that formless potential and that's I think that's the sort of thing that was alluded to by Immanuel Conklin when he was criticizing the notion that all of our information comes from sense data which would be the pure empirical perspective right because when you encounter the world you encounter it with a cognitive structure that already has shape and so it's already in you this structure and without that a priori structure you wouldn't be able to take the formless potential and give it structure and I think that's something it's a can in some way to the idea of God the Father and I'll try to develop that idea more it's it's the it's the notion that there's something in all of us that transcends all of us that's deeply structural that's part of this ancient while I would say evolutionary and cultural process that enables us to grapple with the formless potential and bring forth reality roughly speaking and then there's the final element and that element seems to be something like consciousness itself the consciousness that actually in here's in the individual so it's not only that you have a structure it's that the structure has the capacity for action in the world and it's like it's your this your the spirit that gives the dead structure life it's something like that and as far as I can tell the Trinitarian notion that characterizes Christianity is something like well formless potential which is never given a the status of a deity in Christianity and then the notion that there's an a priori interpretive structure that's a consequence of our ancient existence as beings it goes back as far in time as you can go the notion of a structure and then the idea of a consciousness that that is the is the tool of that structure and that interacts with the world and gives it and gives it reality and that's the word as far as I can tell and so the notion is is that there's a father and that's the structure and there's a son that's transcendent that characterizes consciousness itself and that it's the son the speaking of the son that is the active principle that turns chaos into order and god it's such a sophisticated ideas as far as I'm concerned because well there's something about it that's at least predominately accurate because you do have an interpretive structure and you couldn't understand anything without it your very body is an interpretive structure right it's been crafted over let's say three billion years of evolution without that you wouldn't be able to perceive anything and it's taken a lot of death and struggle and tragedy to produce you the thing that's capable of encountering this immense chaos that surrounds us and to transform it into habitable order and then there's the idea - of course it's deeply embedded in the first chapters of Genesis which is a staggering idea you know and and certainly not one that's likely that human beings were made in the M of God both male and female were made in the image of God and that's of course a very difficult thing to understand partly because the God that's referred to in the in those chapters has a kind of polytheistic element although it's an element that's moving rapidly towards a unified monotheism but it's not also obvious to me why people would come up with that concept because I don't really think that when we think about each other we immediately think God like you know the notion that every single human being regardless of their peculiarities and strangeness is and sins and crimes and all of that has something divine in them that needs to be regarded with respect and that plays an integral role at least an analogy an analogous role in the creation of habitable order out of chaos that's a magnificent remarkable crazy idea and yet we developed it and I do firmly believe that it sits at the base of our legal system I think it is the cornerstone of our legal system that's the notion that everyone is equal before God which is of course a completely that's such a strange idea it's very difficult to understand how anybody could have ever come up with that idea because the manifold differences between people are so so obvious and so evident that you could say the natural way of viewing someone is or human beings is in this extremely hierarchical manner where some people are contemptible and and and easily brushed off as pointless and pathological and and without value whatsoever and all the power accrues to a certain tiny you know aristocratic minority at the top but if you look at the way that the idea of the individual sovereignty developed it's clear that it unfolded over thousands and perhaps ten thousands of years before it became something firmly fixed in the imagination that each individual had something of transcendent value about them and man I tell you we dispense with that idea at our serious peril and so and if you're going to take that idea seriously then which you do because you act it out because otherwise you wouldn't be law abiding citizens right you act that idea out it's it's it's it's firmly shared by by everyone who Ochs in a civilized manner the question is why in the world do you believe it assuming that you believe what you act out which i think is a really good way of fundamentally defining belief so all right so so that's the sort of ideas that there's this this god of tradition and structure that's that's God the Father who uses the Sun which is more of an active force and and primarily something that's verbal which I also think is extremely interesting because it's associated not with thought precisely but with speech and I think the reason for that is is that there's something to speech that's more than mere thought and I think part of the reason for that is that speech is a public utterance and at least in principle speech is something that's shaped by the existence of of everywhere of everyone else at least across time because when you speak you your speeches is put forward in the world as a causal element and it's also subject to criticism and and and cooperation and mutual shaping and so there's an idea here too that speech is that that the cognitive processes that bring habitable reality out of out of uninhabitable chaos have this collective and public element which which is part of the reason by the way that an advocate of free speech let's say above all because I don't think although it is the case for example in the Canadian Bill of Rights that every single right has equal value that's the theory it's an idiotic theory because it's absolutely impossible for a large set of race to have absolutely equal standards statuses that cannot happen there's no way that that can never work but that is the legal judgment but I think it's a huge mistake because free speech has this while this divine quality let's say that you can't escape from because it's the thing that manufactures everything else you know it's and so and I do think that the the dream that you could think of as encapsulated in the stories in Genesis is is the dream by which human beings dreamed up the idea that we would now consider consciousness because you know it took us a long time to figure out the word consciousness it's not like it's bloody obvious it knows how many thousands of years or who knows what struggles we had to undertake to abstract out something like consciousness and how we had to represent that dramatically say or symbolically or in a dreamlike fashion before we could actually formulate the term and and localize that to some degree in people it's very sophisticated so so John makes the case that well there's there's an emanation of God or an element of God the transcendent consciousness it's something like that that acts directly and in a sort of living way with the with the underlying potential of the world and I think that that's phenomenologically accurate and I do think that that's the way we regard our lives because you know when you think about it too we tend to think that what you encounter when you're looking at the world is the material world but that isn't how you act you do act as if you're in a place of potential and also in a place of potential that you can actually transform which is also something extraordinarily strange you know because we do treat each other as if we're capable of bringing new forms into the world in some permanent manner right and we treat each other as if we have free choice and free will and perhaps we don't but it's certainly the case that societies that are predicated on the idea that we don't don't do very well and societies that are predicated on the idea that we do seem to do a lot better Plus people tend to get very annoyed at you if you treat them like they're automatons that lack freewill there's something that people find very I would say constraining slave-like about that even you know that that's a demand that you don't have actual autonomy and even worse that you're not responsible for your choices it's an insult to someone to suggest to them that they're not responsible for their choices you know you usually to do that to someone from a legal perspective you have to argue something like diminished capacity right well you're mentally ill or you don't have the intellectual capacity or or or you were or you were addled by some substance or you had a brain injury or something and that's why you're not responsible for your actions otherwise part of the respect that you get to another human being is the assumption that they're responsible for their actions and some of that can be well if you do something bad then you're responsible for it but part of that too is that if you do something good you're also responsible for that and that also seems necessary because I mean do you really I mean it's got to be more annoying than anything else you can imagine to strive virtuously let's say to produce something of extreme value and then to be treated as if that was a mere deterministic outcome and that your your actual choices have nothing to do with that I mean people find that sort of thing extraordinarily punishing and so I'm willing to you know I mean I know that there are debates about all these things and debates about free will and debates about the nature of consciousness but I'm trying to take a clearer look at how people act and how they want to be treated and then to trace it back to these old ideas to see if there's some if there's some metaphysical let's say metaphysical connection so all right so here's how the here's how the book opens in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth the earth was without form and void and darkness was over the face of the deep and the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters now this is a hard this is a hard what would you call narrative section to get a handle on because in order to understand it properly you have to actually look behind it so there are a lot of pieces of old stories in the Old Testament that flesh out the meaning of these lines and I can I can give you a quick overview of it one of the ideas that lurks underneath these lines although you can't tell because it's in English you have to look at the original languages and of course I don't speak the original languages so I've had to use secondary sources too bad for me but the the the without form and void and the deep idea you see that's associated with this notion of endless deep potential so for example the words that are use to represent without form and void or something like well one is toll I'm going to get this partly wrong toll who elbow who and another one is tailed and it's important to know this because those words are associated with an early mess earlier Mesopotamian word which is Tiamat and timeout was a dragon-like creature who represented the salt water and and timeout had a husband named AB so and timeout adapts who were sort of locked together and kind of a sexual embrace and it was that locking together of time at a nap sue and I would say that's potential and order something like that or chaos in order they were locked together and it was that union of chaos and order that gave rise in the old Mesopotamian myth which is the Anu male ish to the to the two being to the old gods first and then eventually as creation progressed to human beings themselves and so there's this idea lurking underneath this these initial lines that God is akin to that which confronts the unknown and carves it into pieces and makes the world out of its pieces and the thing that it confronts is something like a well it's something like a predatory reptile or something like a dragon or it's something like a serpent and I think part of the reason for that and this this is this is a very deep and ancient idea is that this is where it gets so complicated to do the translation is partly that is how human beings created our world like we went out beyond the confines of our safe spaces let's say our space our safe space is defined by by the tree or defined by the fire and we actively voyaged outward to the places that we were afraid of and didn't understand and conquer and conquered and encountered things out there like like ant like literally animals like mammoths and snakes and predators of all sorts and it was as a consequence of that active brave engagement with the domain of what we did not understand the terrifying domain of what we did not understand that the world in fact was generated and that idea lurks be plea inside that the opening lines of of genesis and it's and it's a profound idea in my estimation and i think see I think also that the way our brains are structured and this is something that I'm going to try to develop more today is that the ancient circuits that our ancestors used to deal with the space beyond which they had already explored that would be home territory that so that's that unknown territory that's that's characterized by promise because there are new things out there but also by intense danger right because we're prey animals especially millions of years ago when we were very young we had to go out there and encounter things that were terribly dangerous and there was a kind of let's say paternal courage that went along with that and it was that the spirit of paternal courage that enabled the conquering of the unknown and there's no difference between the conquering of the unknown and the creation of habitable order and the thing is is that as our cognitive faculties have developed to the point where we're capable of very high levels of abstraction the underlying biological architecture has remained the same and so I don't think that it's too much to say at all that the the circuits that you that engage you for example when you're having an argument about something fundamental with someone that you love and so you're trying to structure the world around you jointly to create a habitable space that you can both exist within you're using the same circuits the extracted version you're using the same circuits that our archaic ancestors would have used when they went out into the unknown itself to encounter beasts and and and predators and and geographical unknowns it's the same circuit it's just that we do it abstractly now instead of concretely but of course it has to be the same circuit because evolution evolution Ares is a very conservative force and what else would it be and this is also why I think it's so easy for us to demonize those people who are enemies because our enemies confront us with what we don't want to with what we don't want to see and they and because of that our first response is to use snake circuit or snake detection circuitry on them and that accounts for our capacity almost immediate capacity to demonize and and there's a reason for that it's not a trivial thing first of all it's a very fast respond and second of all it's a response that has worked for a very very very long time and so you know one of the variants of the hero and I would consider a variant of the hero a like a fragment of the picture of God is is the heroic warrior who slays the enemy right and of course that's not precisely a politically correct representation of the hero in modern times and well in no wonder but it's still something that you go watch in movies all the time and admire right it's it's like this one of the most how many plots are there romance and adventure that's about it and most of the adventure genre is well there's some enemy that's lurking in some form it could be human it could be alien and someone rises up to go and confront it maintain order you know it's like there's no getting away from that story and and if you don't have that in your own life then you play a video game where that's happening or you watch a movie where that's happening you read a book where that's happening and it captures you even if you're atheistic and your only religion is star wars you know and and it's still well really really right it really it still captures your imagination and you act like someone who's possessed by religious fervor when you line up for three days to be the first one into the theater you know and all the while claiming that you're atheistic to the core it's like okay so this this without form and void is this chaotic and it said it's hard thing that it's a hard thing to get a grip on you know what exactly this means but I can give you another kind of example of how you would experience the formless chaos of potential in your own lives and and even how the order that you currently inhabit can dissolve into that and you know in Dante's Inferno when he outlined the levels of Hell so Dante was trying to get to the bottom of what constituted evil really in this representation so it's a work of psychology and he's thinking well there are various ways to behave reprehensibly but there's a hierarchy of reprehensible behavior and there's something absolutely the worst at the bottom and and Daunte believe that it was betrayal and and i think that's right because you know one of the things that enables a long-term cooperation peaceful cooperation between people is trust and i would also say that trust is the fundamental natural resource there's been some very good books written on the economic utility of trust for example in societies where the default economic presupposition between trading partners is trust tend to be rich even if they don't have any natural resources and you can see that for example with what happened with ebay which I think was a kind of miracle because what should have happened with eBay was that you sent me junk and I sent you a check that bounced right and that was the end of eBay but right right exactly but that isn't what happened like the default the default transaction on eBay was so honest that the brokers you could hire brokers to begin with I can't remember what they were called exactly but you could pay someone a fee so that they would guarantee the transaction so you know you wouldn't send me junk and I'd actually send you a payment and we'd pay 10 percent for someone to guarantee that the default trade was so honest that those things vanished right away and so that meant that all this frozen capital roughly speaking which were all the junk that people had lying around that someone else might want instantly became money and the only reason that worked was because people trusted one another and so Trust is an unbelievably powerful economic force may be the most powerful economic force anyways if you have a relationship with someone it's predicated on trust and part of the reason for that is that Trust is what enables us to look at each other without running away screaming and what I mean by that is that if I trust you then I don't have to take into account how complicated you are because you're horribly complicated to know I think chimpanzee full of snakes that's what a human being is and as long as you'll do what you say you'll do then I can take you at your word and your word simplifies you and you can take me at my word and my word simplifies you and then we can act like we understand each other even though we don't but then if that trust is betrayed then all the snakes come forth very very rapidly and so all of you I suspect have been trade one way or another and so what happens if you're in a relationship with someone and you trust them then you make certain assumptions about the past and you make certain assumptions about the present and you make certain assumptions about the future and everything's stable and so you're standing on solid ground and the chaos it's like you're standing on thin ice the chaos is hidden the shark beneath the waves isn't there you're safe you're in the lifeboat but then if the person betrays you like if you're in an intimate relationship and the person has an affair and you find out about it then then you think one moment you're one place right you're where everything is secure because you've predicated your perception of the world on the axiom of trust and the next second really the next second you're in a completely different place and not only is that place different right now the place you were years ago is different and the place you're going to be in the future years hence is different and so all of that certainty that strange certainty that you inhabit can collapse into incredible complexity and you say well if someone betrays you you think well okay who were you because you weren't who I thought you were and I thought I knew you but I didn't know you at all and I never knew you and so all the things we did together those weren't the things that I thought were happening something else was happening and you're you or someone else and that means I'm someone else because I thought I knew what was going on and clearly I don't I'm some sort of blind sucker or the or the victim of a psychopath or someone who's so naive that they can barely live and I don't understand anything about human beings and they don't understand anything about myself and I have no idea where I am now I thought it was at home but I'm not I'm in a house and it's full of strangers and I don't know what I'm going to do tomorrow or next week or next year it's like all of that certainty that habitable certainty it collapses right back into the potential from which it emerged and that's a terrifying thing that's a journey to the underworld from a mythological perspective and that is really something worth knowing because you know journeys to the underworld are extraordinarily common in mythological stories and you know like The Hobbit going out to find a Smaug the dragon and and get the gold as a journey into the underworld and journeys to the underworld how and all the time and modern people don't understand what the Wonderworld is except that we've all been there and we go there all the time and we go there every time the solidity and stability of the world that we've erected at least partly through our speech is shattered because while some sort of snake appears that's another way of thinking about it that it's a really good way of thinking about it because you know no matter how carefully you construct a little habitable area that surround you there's always something you didn't take into account and there's always something that can pop up its head and do you in and make you aware of your mortality and and age you for that matter or even kill you and that's the permanent that's the permanent situation of life which is part of the reason why I think the story of Adam and Eve for example is archetypal it's because we do inhabit walled gardens right because a walled garden is half structure Society and half nature that's what a walled garden is and a walled garden is a place of paradise and warmth and and and and and and love and and and sustenance but it's also the place where something can pop up at any moment and knock you out of it and I think part of the reason that that story exists at the beginning of this collection of books is because it explains the eternal situation of human beings we're always in that situation we're in a walled garden or we bloody well hope we are but there's always a snake and then it's even worse because if there is a snake or exactly the sort of creatures who are going to do nothing but go and interact with that state the second that we can manage it you know it's it's definitely the case that if you want a human being to muck around with something the best thing to do is to tell them not ever to do it have anything to do with it which is of course something you know if you have teenagers or even children or or if you know anything about yourself or your partner so these stories are trying to express what you might describe as an unchanging transcendent reality you know it's it's something like what's common across all human experience across all time and that's what young essentially meant by an archetype and you could say well you know we tend think that what we see with our senses is real and of course that's true but what we see with our senses is what's real that worked at the timeframe that we exist in right and so we see things that we can touch and pick up we see tools essentially that are useful for our moment-to-moment activities we don't see the structures of eternity especially not the abstract structures of eternity we have to imagine those with our imagination and that's partly what these stories are doing they're saying well there's there's forms of stability that transcend our capacity to observe which is hardly surprising we know that if we're scientists right because we're always abstracting out things that we can't immediately observe but there are meta physical or moral realities or phenomenological realities that have the same nature that you can't see them in your life by observing them with your senses but you can imagine them with your imagination and though sometimes the things that you imagine with your imagination are more real than the things that you see numbers are like that for example and there's endless examples of that and I would say well this is also a good way of thinking about fiction because a good work of fiction is more real than the stories from which it was derived otherwise it has no staying power right it's distilled reality even though in some sense it never happened it's like well it depends on what you mean by happened you know it's a it's a pattern that repeats in many many places with variation you extract out the central pattern it's it's the pattern purely never existed in any specific form but the fact that you pulled a pattern out from all those exemplars means that he's extracted something real and I think the reason that the the story of Adam and Eve which we'll talk about in quite a bit of detail today has it has been immune to being forgotten is because it says things about the nature of the human condition that are always true it can give you another brief example you know like people have a lot of guilt you know there's a line of social psychology that claims that most people feel that they're better than other people like I just don't buy that that isn't what I've seen in my life and maybe it's I'm bit biased because I'm a clinical psychologist and I see more people who are overtly suffering maybe then people do in general although I'm not so sure about that you know because you don't have to scratch very far beneath the surface of most people's lives before you find something truly tragic and I don't mean the sort of tragedy that you whine about I mean you know your mother has Alzheimer's or your best friend committed suicide or you have a close relative with cancer you have a sick child or you know there's something wrong with you because almost everyone has at least one really terrible thing wrong with them and if you don't hey you will so you know so know that that so so that that tragic sense of being is there with people all the time and and and it's also the case that not in my experience like I rarely meet someone who says hey you know I'm doing everything I possibly can I'm a hell of a guy and I can't see how I could possibly improve you know you meet you meet someone like that you think their narcissistic write would end you're right and but but most people don't feel that way they feel like they could do a hell of a lot better than they are and they're quite acutely aware of their faults and they don't feel that they're what they should be and you see what happens in the story of Adam and Eve as well as that when people become self conscious at least that's how it looks to me they get thrown out of paradise and then they're in history and history is a place where there's pain in childbirth and where you're dominated by your mate and where you have to toil like mad like no other animal because you're aware of the future you have to work and sacrifice the joys of the present for the future constantly and you know you're going to die and you have all that weight on you and to me again that's just how can anything be more true than that that's just as far as I can tell that's just how it is for unless you're naive beyond comprehension there's something about your life that that that is echoed in in that representation and why it is that I mean we're such strange creatures because we don't seem to really fit into being in some sense and that's also what's expressed in the notion of the fall we the existentialist said well people feel like they have a debt that they have to pay off to existence for the for the crime of their for the crime of the being something like that and maybe it's because we are acutely aware that we have to offer something of value to the people around us so that they can tolerate us you know well we're going about our business but it seems deeper than that it's that human beings seem to exist in a post cataclysmic world and that's exactly also what's represented in Genesis it's very interesting because you know there's in the out of an EVE story there's two there's two catastrophes essentially there's the catastrophe that occurs went out of an EVE wake up which we'll talk about in detail and become self conscious and know that they're naked that and their eyes are open right so that that's the terminology that's used and to have your eyes open means to have an an increment in consciousness essentially because eyes are associated with consciousness for human beings because we're intensely visual animals and so the metaphor of having your eyes open means it's the same as the metaphor of coming to consciousness and as soon as Adam and Eve come to consciousness they realize they're naked and you know the classic interpretation of that is that it has something to do with sexual sin and I don't I don't believe that I don't believe that that's what it means although they're elements about that that are relevant it's more that to realize that you're naked it's like you're you know if you dream that you're naked and on a stage in front of people that's not a sexual dream man unless you're some kind of strange exhibitionist right it's if you want to cover yourself up and get the hell off that stage as fast as possible and so to be naked in front of a crowd is to have everyone it's to have the judgement of the social world focused on your self-evident inadequacies and that makes people self-conscious and that's that's a real human state it's associated with neuroticism in the big five trade model but people don't like that at all they don't like having their fragility and vulnerability exposed to the group it's one of the two major fears of people because one is social humiliation and the other is something like mortality and death and like your typical agoraphobic for example gets to have both those fears at the same time because she usually as she tends to believe she's going to have a very spectacular and exhibitionistic heart attack in a public place and make a terrible fool of herself while she's dying so and then that's a good example of the two archetypal fears that characterize characterized human beings so so to me and I said that I tried to approach these stories as if I didn't know what they were about because that seemed right to me because their mysteries their everything about them is mysterious and why we have them is mysterious and what the hell you're all doing here is mysterious you know listening to this lecture and so and reading Hume because you and Carl Jung was very very helpful in this because he he faced these stories with the beginner's mind and presumed there was something to him that he didn't understand given that they were at the very bloody bottom of our civilization you know which is historically perfectly clear and that they came out of the midst of time and he wasn't satisfied with the idea that a Freudian idea that God was just the father or the Marxist idea that religion was the opiate of the masses it's like if religion was the opiate of the masses then communism was the methamphetamine of the masses I can tell you that so so you know you've been betrayed by someone and so you fall into that underworld of doubt about everything and it's a serious place to be in that underworld a because not only do you not know where you came from or who you are where you're going that's bad enough so that's the underworld itself but there's a subdivision of the underworld like the worst suburb which is I think what hell is essentially from the metaphysical perspective because you know if someone really cuts you off at the knees especially if they do it in a malevolent way and and if you're going to be betrayed and you really want to be betrayed properly you want to be betrayed by someone who's really out to hurt you you know they just weren't being stupid they were like after you for whatever reason and then that's also you plunged into that underworld space and that's also when you start to nurse feelings of resentment and aggrievement and murder and homicide and even worse you know because if people are betrayed enough they start they start to obsess about the utility of being itself and perhaps go to places that no one would ever want to go if they were in the right mind and to and to develop a nurse fantasies of the ultimate revenge and that's a horrible place to be and that's hell as far as I can tell and that's why hell has always been a suburb of the underworld because if if you get plunged into a situation that you don't understand and things are not good for you anymore it's one step from being completely confused it's only one step from being completely confused to being completely outraged and resentful and then it's only one step from there to really looking for revenge and that can take you places that well that that merely to imagine properly can be traumatic and I've seen that happen with people many times and I think that anybody who uses their imagination on themselves can see how that happens because I don't imagine there's a single person in the room that hasn't nursed fairly intense fantasies of revenge at least at one point in their life and usually you know for what appear to be good reasons it's no picnic to get betrayed that's for sure that can shake your faith in being but if it shakes it so badly that you turn against being itself that's certainly no solution that's for sure all it does is make everything that's bad even worse so okay now so and God said let there be light and there was light and God saw that the light was good and God separated the light from the darkness and so that's that's another that's another fundamental separation right light and darkness those are those are in some sense the two fundamental two of the fundamental elements of our conscious being because of course when it's light we're awake and conscious because we're diurnal animals and when it's night well then we're asleep and so our existence is bounded by light and darkness we're up and alert when it's light and that's partly because we're highly visual animals right unlike most animals because most animals you smell we we use vision we're very strange that way and vision is associated with enlightenment and illumination and with the breaking of the dawn with the coming of the new day and all of that so and so for light to be created is associated in some sense with the emergence of conscious being and so that's another echo of that notion and they're the the particular phrasing of the of the story also is important because it's again that God fed right so that's the use of that word and that's the active element of the structure that gives rise to the gives order to chaos it's something like that so it's it's like the spirit of the structure manifests itself and produces the fundamental divisions of experience that's what's being presented here and God separated the light from the darkness he called the light day and the darkness he called night and again again the fact that things are named is also very important so you see this later with Adam because God gives Adam the job of naming all the animals and it's sort of like the animals don't actually exist in some sense till they're named and that's that's another indication of the authors of the Bible's attempt to come to terms with the fact that our cognitive faculties and our ability to speak have something to do with the way that we task chaotic potential into actuality right because we can't we can't really get a grip on something before we have a name for it which is like for example you all have names and everything that you encounter has to have a name because before it has a name it's just kind of part of the blurry background in something like that and you could say it exists before it has a name but and that's true but it's also true that it doesn't exist before it has a name because as soon as you give something a name its nature changes and you've transformed it into something that's not so much mere potential anymore but it's at least on its way to being actuality it's on its way to being a tool and so the act of naming is repeated continually in the first chapters of the Bible and the reason for that is this continued emphasis on the importance of consciousness and conscious articulation and speech you know when speech is really something that does separate us in an important way from animals you know like we haven't got very far teaching animals how to speak the best we've managed so far as some parrots right there's gray African parrot there is one of them that got up to about a four-year-old level and that's mind-boggling because like how big is the brain of a parrot it's like that big and that bloody thing could talk and so that shows you how much we know about brains but I know they're small and all that but and we tried teaching chimpanzees to talk and they could kind of get somewhere with sign language especially if you started when they were young but they don't have the capacity for language like we do and they were never able to really pass it on to the to the next generation which is obviously a critical element of really having that ability so human beings we've used our linguistic capacity to parse up the world in a new way and to conceptualize it in a new way and you know you can say that we're just like ants on this little trivial planet out on the edge of one of a hundred million galaxies and that what's happening here has no cosmic significance but that's an arbitrary that's an arbitrary proposition you know I mean we're very complicated things and whatever's going on on this planet has to do with conscious reality and the transformations of consciousness for all we know might be the most important things that happen everywhere there's no reason to consider consciousness a trivial phenomena I mean it's taken three and a half billion years for you to develop the brain that you've developed and you and human beings are amazing creatures I mean just a casual walk through YouTube and all those crazy kids that climb cranes and do that what's that that ya parkour man that stuff's unbelievable you know I mean human beings are crazy crazy animals there's almost nothing we can't do and I'm very loath to assume that the transformations of consciousness that are described in the early in the early stories in in the biblical accounts are somehow cosmically trivial it doesn't strike me that way and it's certainly not self-evident and even if they are cosmically trivial whatever that means the rocks don't care what you think well who cares what the rocks think first they don't think so I don't see why that's exactly relevant but even if even if it's all the same to the cosmos which is something that I doubt it's certainly not just all the same to you you know because your consciousness has a quality and it matters the Heidegger for example who's a philosopher who who's writing sort of influenced me post-talk because i recreated some of the things that he had talked about in the 30s before I knew much about him but one of the things that Heidegger said was that the fundamental element of human being of human phenomenology was care he said that that's the basic essence of your being is that you care about things you know and that's necessary that either negatively or positively right you to not care about something or to hate it is still to be involved in care and so even if the cosmos itself is is neutral with regards to our existence we're not and we're the only things that we know of that are conscious and so while we might as well go with that and there's no reason see I can't help but think that the constant attempts by people to trivialize the nature of their own consciousness has a dark side I'm a psychoanalyst and so I always think that way it's like well first of all if you're if you as a being don't matter then you don't have to do anything it's a great justification for total lack of responsibility and that that really twigs something for me because you know people who are bent let's say or vengeful or angry are always looking for a reason why they don't have to be responsible for anything it's a lot easier and so the notion that consciousness is trivial immediately allows you to wander down that path and so I'm skeptical of those claims and I also think that there's a deep hatred of humanity that underlies those claims as well and I read my youtube comments sometimes you know and I've always been I've always been annoyed that you know because I've heard like sort of radical clueless environmentalists say things like planet would be better off without people on it which is something that like you just cannot say that that if you say that and listen to yourself you should like go to a monastery for like three years and never say a word and have a shower every 10 minutes until you've learned your lesson properly you know you can't adhere a more genocide 'el phrase than that you know and of course you always do it in a display of your care for the world it's like well if we just didn't have any people it's like well we'll just line them all up and shoot them with machine guns no it's really sickening it's appalling and there's a hatred for humanity that's at the bottom of it and I mean you can kind of understand why because we're messy and you know we don't clean up after ourselves and you know we're like raping the rain forests and that sort of thing but I do have some sympathy for people because you know we're we're hell on mother nature but she certainly returns the favor so and that's a good thing to remember you know a lot of what we're doing is just bloody well trying to exist with a relative minimum of pain and we're doing our best to get you know to get as good at doing that as fast as we can and that's not an easy thing there are lots of us and like life is bloody complicated and the other thing that happens too is again if you scratch just beneath the surface of people and this is something that's always you know to me is being a kind of miracle is if you talk to someone they're out doing their job and maybe they're doing a good job at it like some emergency room nurse you know it's God there's a job for you or maybe they work in palliative care you know and you talk to them and you find out they've got like four as I said before serious problems in their family and maybe they're diabetic to boot and yet they haul themselves out of bed in the morning and go take care of dying people it's like good god people deserve a bit of respect for struggling forward and not always trying to make the planet a worse play when they're beset on all sides constantly by you know unending series of tragedy you think we could have a little bit of sympathy for ourselves as a consequence of that it's like we're not all like rapacious greedy monsters who are bent on just devouring everything in our path you know it's a little bit more complicated than that so all right anyway so so well so let's go to the next part of this here mmm-hmm all right so God said let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters and let it separate the waters from the waters and God made the expanse and separated the waters that were under the expanse from the waters that were above the expanse and it was so and God called the expanse heaven and there was evening and there was morning the second day well to understand that because what how did that doesn't make any sense at all really so I think I told you a little bit about this before so the the the world that's being created in this particular account is a phenomenological world there's a disc of land because if you go out in a field and look around you're on a disk of labs that's pretty obvious and then there's a dome on top of it it's more or less held up by the mountains and rain comes down so there's water above the dome because where else would the rain come from and underneath the ground there's fresh water you can drill down and find out and then around out there's salt water and so that's the world and it's kind of an empirical world because if you're a child and you just go out in the field and you look at the world that's sort of what it would be like and so that's the world that's being created and so one of the things that is worth thinking about this is something Carl Jung was very interested in is that these old descriptions are half geographical and half empirical so sort of based on observation and half psychological so one of the things young was interested in for example was astrology but mostly for a psychological reason because you know they're obviously there are stars up on the dome and then when you look at the stars you can imagine the shapes of the stars and that helps you orient yourself because as soon as you can see shapes and the stars then you can recognize the constellations and you can orient yourself at night but then the constellations become God's say and the gods turn into a drama and so and the drama comes from then it's the projection of imagination and so when Young was analyzing astrology he was in that analyzing psychology because he saw the astrological narrative as the projection of the human imagination onto the cosmos and so when he was analyzing astrology who was analyzing psychology and that the same thing is the case with these stories is that the world they they describe is only it's not the natural world like a scientist would describe it because these people weren't scientists they didn't have the technology in the tool it was it was the way they were for them it was the world for us it's the way they saw the world and so we're looking at the way they saw the world and a lot of that psychology and we share that psychology to a large degree with those people so in this is psychology but it's interesting to know what the geographical substrate is so that you can kind understand the stories and I like this picture because that's it's great from a psychological perspective it's a very famous picture you know so basically what you have here is the world as we know it and there's the dome with the Sun and the moon on it and the stars and then if you look outside what you know well then you're out into this cosmic space right and that's those are like the wheels of the planets and the music of the spheres and that's the ever-present Explorer who's gone beyond the domain that he can understand and is peering out into the unknown as such and it's a psychological picture it's like because you do know some things and then outside of that there are things you don't know and when you're feeling brave you put a foot or two out where you don't understand like because there's frontier everywhere right and if you're if you're feeling heroic and you want to do something for the world and you want to expand what you understand you poke your head through what you know and you take a look at the that's the at whatever structure is out there and you know he's pretty smart because most of them is still where it's safe and I would say that's a good that's a good thing because if you jump right out there well then maybe you fall off the edge of the earth and I wouldn't precisely recommend that especially if you do it accidentally and to me this is a recreation of the of the Taoist yin-yang symbol you know with the with the white Paisley here and that's what no in the dark paisley serpents really there and the right place to be is right on the line between them because you're sort of got one foot where you understand that gives you security and then you know but it's kind of dull because hey you know everything that's going on there and that is what people are like they don't want just security Dostoyevsky said that in notes from the underground a great great book and you know he said I love this it was his early critic criticism of the notion of a political utopia he said look if you gave people everything they wanted they had nothing to eat but take and nothing to do but sit in warm pools and busy themselves with the continuation of the species that was his his lives that the first thing they would do well maybe after the first week was like gold kind of half insane and smash everything up just so that something that they didn't expect would happen so that they'd have something interesting to do and it's so right because you know that the utopian notion that if you just had all the material stuff you wanted that you'd you'd be well what would you be what what would you do would you just sit in the couch and watch TV I mean you did you'd be I don't know why you'd be cutting yourself just for entertainment in no time slot you know and that's the sort of thing that people do and so we're not adapted for security in Utopia were adapted for a certain amount of security because you know we are vulnerable but mostly we want to have one foot out where we don't know what the hell is going on because that's where your alert and alive and tense and with it and and you know I think I believe this and I believe it actually has something to do with the hemispheric structure of your of your of the physiology of your brain is it because the right hemisphere looks roughly adapted to what you don't know and the left hemisphere and this is a very this is an oversimplification but a useful one is adapted to the world that you do know and the right place for you to be is halfway between them because then you can tell that that's what's so cool and this tells you that this is actually reality that's manifesting itself to you you know that sense of active engagement you have in the world when things are working well for you you know where you're where you should be at the right time you're alert and on top of things and engaged and you don't have much of a sense of time and the sense of the tragedy of life sort of recedes and that's when your that's when you've got one foot when it's where it's secure in one foot out in the unknown and your brain signals to you that you're in the right place by making what you're doing meaningful and that sense of meaning is actually a neuro physiological signal that you've got the forces of the cosmos properly balanced in your being at that moment and that's why it feels so good and then well what else could it possibly be I mean you know our brain is capable of looking beyond our vision that's what it's for and that sense of engagement there's no reason to assume that that's anything but a real signal and you can reduce it you could say well the problem with being where you know only is that you don't know everything and that's going to be a problem in the future and the problem with being where you know nothing is that's just too much man like you know you go into panic mode and because anything can happen there and you can't handle it so you've got to mediate between those two things you want to be secure enough so that your physiology isn't revving out of control and you want to be out there in the unknown enough so that you keep updating yourself constantly constantly constantly and that's that's the place where information flow is maximized and you know that because that's where you are when you're having a really interesting conversation with someone or you're gripped by a book or you're really into a movie or maybe something that you do as a you know apart from your work or maybe even in your work you're into it and that's because you are in the right place at the right time and your whole nervous system is signaling that to you and I would say that's the sort of place that you should be all the time of course you can't be because no one's perfect but it's that's that's the recreation of paradise on earth it's something like it because you are in the right place at the right time when that is happening subject to certain what would you say restrictions that we can talk about later well that's what this guy is doing and and that's I would say akin to the action that God is taking when he's transforming the chaos of potential into habitable being and it's the sort of thing that human beings supposed to act out and God said let the waters under heaven be gathered together into one place and let the dry land appear and it was so God called the dry land earth and the waters that were gathered together he called seas and God saw that it was good well that's an interesting thing too because you know there's this display written by a German named Gupta I can never say that properly it's johann van goe t-80 and I can't say it but he wrote this play called Faust and he wrote one part of it when he was quite young and then Klaus - when he was quite old and he has a character in there Mestas tov ELISA message da fleece is the devil and he actually has the devil explaining himself twice basically using the same words which which I really like it was very profound and basically Goethe's Memphis dolly says you know he's the adversary of the word that's a good way of putting it because that's how it works out mythologically he's the figure behind the snake in the Garden of Eden which is something we'll talk about more but he has a he has a sophisticated philosophy he's not just some random troublemaker he's got a he's got a deep philosophy and his philosophy is quite straightforward and it's compelling it's compelling and people are gripped by it quite often far more often than they think his philosophy is well look around at the world like Ivan karamakov in The Brothers Karamazov when he's trying to disabuse his younger brother of being a Christian monk Memphis awfully says well look at the world I mean all we look around the world it's nothing but a bloodbath it's just suffering everywhere everything eats everything and people die terribly and and they're cruel to one another and the whole mass is nothing but a constant hall of terrible carnage and ruin and and and and and and wreck he says it should be better if it was never existed at all and that's a very interesting that's a very very interesting idea and I do believe and I've seen this in people many times but in the depths of despair especially when you've been betrayed for example and you wander into the wrong subdivision of the underworld that something that comes to mind if you know you have a very sick child for example or maybe your whole family is suffering as whole families do sometimes an idea is going to come to you it's like good God who put this mess together and is it really worth it is it really worth the suffering suicidal people you know they say no they say no enough of this you know and you have to be pushed a long way generally speaking before you'll actually commit suicide you have to be in very very desperate straits but your answer under those conditions is that being is such that it would be better if it had never been and that's a very I think I think it's a very it's a terrible philosophy I believe because I think what happens if you act it out is that you make the very things that led you to despair far worse and I can't see that if it's reasonable to draw a logical conclusion that suffering should justifies your desire to make being end that the answer to that can't be to produce more suffering it just doesn't make sense and my observation has been that people who act out the Memphis tothey liyan philosophy inevitably make suffering far worse and so and then that raises the other specter of well do they want being just diseased or they just out for bloody revenge at every at any cost and my conclusion has always been that is that the mask is well being shouldn't exist because it's too terrible but the true motivation is I'm going to make everyone suffer as much as I possibly can before I say goodbye to this place if you read the writings of people like the kids who showed up the Columbine High School they'll tell you exactly that that's precisely and exactly what they conclude it and then act it out so anyways but in this God says that it was good and I thought about that a lot is like because the question is something like well is it something better than nothing because that's a really good question you know and I thought about two things in relationship to that and one is one is well maybe it depends on how it is that you are right because it could be that there are ways of being in the world to justify the world and their ways of being in the world that makes the world unbearable and I believe that the narrative that runs through the biblical stories is precisely a dialogue between those two types of BA and the optimistic part of the story is that being requires limitation and suffering there's no escape from that but there are modes of being that allow that to be perhaps even more than tolerable perhaps there are modes of being that allow that to be good and it's a straight and narrow road it's a very difficult road to tread so so I think well that that's possible you know I'm not an optimist by nature and but that's that's one of the things that I've conceptualized and read about that I actually find plausible because it's certainly the case everyone knows this that there are ways that you can act and make things worse everyone knows that and so if that's the case there has to be the opposite right there has to be ways that you could act that make things better and obviously you can act in ways that make things really way worse and so the question is well are there ways that you can act and make things really much better and I think that's the question is can we have our cake and eat it too can we have the being that requires limitation and suffering and also simultaneously transcend that by our mode of being and I believe that the biblical stories and then perhaps not only the biblical stories but the biblical stories are the human imagine one of the human imaginations best attempt to address and answer that question that's what the entire story is about so the first of it is the catastrophe of the collapse of self-consciousness and the entrance of humanity into history and the rest of it is okay now we're in history now we know that we're going to die we know about our mortality we're conscious of our own being is there a mode of acting in the world that allows that to be justifiable or maybe even more that allows that to be triumphant and then I would also say maybe it's worth finding out you know that that's the other thing that's so interesting because you've got this short time on earth and there's lots of things that are very very difficult to contend with and and you have the problem of tolerating yourself even in all your insufficiency and one of the things that seems to me to be the case is that if you adopt a sufficiently profound mode of being if you attempt to do that then the mere act of lifting up that weight is enough to justify the fact that your insufficient and mortal and and bound by tragedy and I believe that and I believe people believe that because if you watch how people act they look for people they admire and they do admire people right it's a natural it's a natural phenomena you see it starting with children be children admire and then they imitate and we look to people who seem to be able to bear the burden of being in a heroic manner and there's something inside of us that calls to that and it makes us want to to mimic that and to follow it and I think that that's I think that's the deepest and most profound of instincts and I think it's right and even if you're not so convinced on the positive end you know because it's more difficult to be convinced of the positive you can certainly be convinced on the negative end because there are ways of being that are so brutal and so reprehensible that merely to read about them is enough to traumatize you and I think that if you're a person who hasn't lost their soul completely you can't help but encounter stories like that and shudder away from them and you know Alexander Solzhenitsyn who who was the person who did most announce the absolute horrors of communist totalitarianism said that he believed that the Nuremberg judgments were the most important event of the 20th century and that was the judgment at the end of World War two that there were certain actions that no one was to undertake no matter what their cultural background was because they were let's say crimes against humanity that there was such a thing as universal evil and you can debate that you know I mean and people certainly have but the problem is is if you debate that then you have to say that there are conditions under which the sorts of things that happen say in the concentration camps which would be the gassing of children after their torture and and their their forcible removal from their parents and all the terrible things that went along with that that that's just okay it's just an opinion it's just something that happened and there are circumstances under which that's justifiable if there's no transcendent good and evil underneath that argument it's only a matter of practicality and and and it seems to me that that's that's not the right conclusion to draw that's how it seems to me and that's what the Solzhenitsyn concluded when he looked at the Nuremberg trials so the notion that the notion that it was good well even if you don't believe that and you know because maybe it's not as good as it could be I would say it's incumbent on you as someone who participates in the process of a furthering creation to act as if it could be good at least and to further that with with all of your efforts partly because what the hell else do you have to do that could possibly be better than that that could possibly justify your existence more than that and you know perfectly well if you if you have any sense at all if you think clearly about it at all is that that's what you want to see in everyone else you know it's you're you're desperate and maybe you're cynical and now and then someone appears that acts at least momentarily like a light in the darkness enough lifts your spirit up and gives you a little bit of hope and maybe helps you continue on well that's obviously a call to being if it's a statement from your old soul that says well there's something about that that's how you should be and maybe then well we get a chance to to participate in what is good I thought too you know well we'll leave that for a little later and God said let the earth sprout vegetation plants yielding seed and fruit trees bearing fruit in which is their seed each according to its kind on the earth and it was so and the earth brought forth vegetation plants yielding seed according to their own kind and trees bearing fruit in which is their seed each according to its kind and God saw that it was good and there was evening and there was morning the third day I like that that's you see it's interesting these old pictures say because if you look here you got you got this halo around God's head and you've got to split again between night and darkness and gods right on the on the border between the two and that's the Sun right that's what that's what a halo is halo is the Sun or the moon sometimes it's like a coin you know you have the Queen's head on the coin and that's the queen on the moon and it's silver and it's a symbol of value because of course the Queen is sovereign and the moon is the sovereign of the night sky and and gold of course is the Sun and gold is pure because it doesn't mix with other metals and it shines like the Sun so it partakes of the Sun and god partakes of the Sun because there's something about whatever he represents that's associated with consciousness and illumination and enlightenment it's that force of illumination enlightenment that's it's right on the border between these two sets of phenomena and that's that's kind of what that picture is trying to present and so you know it's a metaphor that's one way of thinking about it but it does again allude to the underlying idea that there's something about consciousness that's integral to to being itself God said let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens to separate the day from the night and let them be for signs and for seasons and for days and for years that's a that's a remarkable bit of a bit of writing there too because you just think about how bloody long it took our caveman ancestors to look at the night sky and start to figure out that there were repeating patterns across years that enabled them to mark the seasons I mean I just can't imagine how they figured that out it's that degree of careful observation that it took and I mean we know people figure that out a long time ago because ah you know those great megalithic monuments like Stonehenge seem to be astronomical observatories essentially and you see the same thing with the pyramids I mean people were looking at the damn sky trying to figure out looking at God you know because that's kind of what you're doing when you're looking at the night sky trying to figure out the regularity and order in the universe and that's all compacted into this little light you know and let them be for signs and for seasons to be oriented by the Stars amazing and that let them be lights in the expanse of heavens to give light upon the earth and it was so and God made the two great lights the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night and the Stars and God set them in the expanse of heavens to give light on the earth to rule over the day and over the night and so there's an idea of sovereignty there too right that that that there's an analogy between the ruler and the and the heavenly bodies that that light up the that light up the darkness essentially and that's a really interesting idea too because it took us a long time to come to terms with as I mentioned last week to come to term with the idea of sovereignty itself and to decide what constituted valid power it's not power it's not power its authority and competence and not power it's not dominance either it's more sophisticated than that because the people that you want to rule aren't people who have power because power just means I can hurt you and you can't hurt me back that's that's not that that's not what you need from a ruler even though it devolves into that from time to time what you want is the kind of wisdom that illuminates the darkness and to associate the sovereign with with the heavenly kings of the light is a perfectly reasonable thing to do from a metaphoric perspective and that's an ancient ancient idea you know and another example of how we're grounded in a dream that God set them in the expanse of heavens to give light on the earth to rule over the day in the night and to separate the light from the darkness and God saw that it was good another emphasis on the fact that it was better that there was something than nothing and you know maybe you could maybe you could consider that the Declaration of the cosmos is something like well it's better that there's something than nothing and well how do you know that and I guess the answer to that is that there's something instead of nothing and I know that that's not proof but but it's still a remarkable fact that it happens to be the case and no one does know why that is so maybe we should go along with it and see what we can do with it you know and see how we could make it better because we certainly could if we were if we were really committed to it and we shook our resentment and our our anger and our hatred and I know there's reason for all of that because people do suffer terribly but you know god only knows what being could be like if we all contributed it contributed to it to the best of our ability god only knows what we could conquer and what sort of magnificent cities we could produce and what things we could we could eradicate from from from the suffering of the world and there was you know there's this guy I read about this is amazing and I don't remember his name but he he found out about this worm that was called the guinea worm and guinea worm is a really horrible thing and you can look it up if you want but I'll tell you a little bit about it even though it's very distasteful so I get any worm is a parasite that lives in Africa and it burrows under your skin and it's quite long it's about that long and it's you know about that wide and so it'll burrow underneath your leg and then it's in there you know and maybe it pokes its little head out a hole which is one of its delightful tendencies and then if you want to pull it out it breaks right because obviously because otherwise you just pull it out it would be dead and so it doesn't like that so it just breaks off and many many people had this horrible disease you know and it's well you can you can't imagine what that would be like because you're a part of the 1% and you live in North America and thank God for that but you know just a little imagine you don't even want to think about it let alone have it and he went to Africa and wiped the damn thing out it's like great you know it seems to me the planets a lot better off without any guinea worms on it even though that's like guinea worm genocide talk I'm still you know pretty happy about it and so that was that was one guy who thought well we don't need these things and yeah well fair enough you know and yeah well so good for him like you know I mean he can die thinking that the world's a better place than it was when he first popped out and so so good for that that NASA I think that's a good that's a good aim you know I think is to think that when you're on your deathbed you can look back and think well there's a little less suffering in the world from here on out than there would be if I had never existed and that's a lot better than the opposite because it's certainly possible say if you're Stalin to ensure that there's a hell of a lot more suffering in the world than there would have been if you hadn't lived and we perfectly well know that people can manage that and that many many people try to do nothing but in that but manage precisely that so and it's hard for me not to think about that as some sort of metaphysical evil and I think it's the right way to look at it and there was evening and there was morning.the 4th day so yeah you have the Sun here and then the moon here as far as I can tell yeah yeah actually I think this is the moon over here but but so yeah that's part of the Sistine Chapel which is you know an absolutely remarkable and then they know part of the reason - and the part of the reason I'm teaching about these biblical stories is because you know I'm thinking because the humanities have be decimated so badly and again I think that has mostly to do with resentment and hatred more than anything else but I don't really think that you can get a grip on the humanities and what they have to offer without knowing the biblical stories because they're the they're the dream out of which the humanities emerge and so unless you have that background knowledge that dream then there's all sorts of things that are utterly profound that don't open themselves up to you and Dante's Inferno would be one of those and Milton's Paradise Lost which is an absolutely amazing piece of work I mean Milton wrote it because he wanted to justify the ways of God to man you know what an ambition that is and I mean he was serious about that he took the problem seriously it's like it's the Memphis dethalian problem is that well this is a rough business that were involved in and you know maybe maybe we should just give it up I think the world the whole world I think was deciding that in the 1980s when we were deciding whether we going to engage in the ultimate nuclear catastrophe you know and we were very very close to that a number of times and I think it was a collective decision in some sense on the part of humanity that we might as well keep the whole awful game going rather than just demolish it but um but you know Milton he wrote Paradise Lost - it's a dream again it's a dream trying to explain the nature of being and the nature of evil and you can't crack the damn thing without knowing the underlying stories and that's really too bad because it's utterly profound and the reason you need profound things as far as I can tell you need profound knowledge is because life is actually a profound problem for everyone I mean you can shelter back and live a very conservative existence and look like more power to you I understand why you would do that but it doesn't stop you from having to face the ultimate questions of life right there right there in everyone's face and at least at some point your life and it would be better if you could I think if you could confront them full-on and to deal with them properly and to be a beacon of strength as a consequence of vadas and it's and I think that wisdom that's what the humanities are supposed to teach his wisdom and wisdom is what enables you to deal honorably with the tragedy of life and I think you I can't see how you could think that that was a bad idea because they're going to be times when you're in an emergency room and you know prone to panic and to and to cry and to break down and to and to collapse and to be of no use to anyone around you and that's not the right way to be it's the right way to be in a situation like that is to be strong and reliable and I don't think you can do that without being wise and you can't be wise without putting yourself together and without knowing something about where you came from and what you're like and that that's history and the humanities and so this isn't optional it's it's it's more necessary the man does not live by bread alone and that's exactly the issue here so you see these magnificent works you know I mean there's a there's it's not like Michelangelo thought of this literally you know he was a genius for god sake and he's trying to get at something and and he's trying to get at the profundity of human culture I suppose that's why you have this patriarchal figure here and the cosmic role that consciousness and tradition plays in being itself and and it's ennobling and you know you think people religious or not people hundreds of millions of people come from all over the world to Rome and go through this little tiny chapel to look at this it's something in it that everyone needs to see you know it's not just beauty it's more than beauty it's it's that which feeds the soul and everyone feels that even if they can't explain it so and God said let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures and let birds fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens so God created the great sea creatures and every living creature that moves with which the waters swarm according to their kinds and every winged bird according to its kind and God saw that it was good and God blessed them saying be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters in the seas and that birds multiply on the earth and there was evening and there was morning the fifth day and God said let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds livestock and creeping beasts creeping things and beasts of the earth according to their kinds and it was so and God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds and the livestock according to their kinds and everything that creeps on the ground according to its kind kind right that's kin right and to be kind is to treat others as if they're your kin and so according to its kind and God saw that it was good that continually continually represented over and over God said that's the thing that calls being into existence and God said it was good and that's the fundamental judgment about the nature of reality and you know one of the things that happens in the in the translation in the movement let's say from the Old Testament to the New Testament is God is obviously blessing creation in the beginning of this story and then you have Old Testament God and like don't mess around with him right because he'll give you a good smiting if you get out of line there's no doubt about that and he's kind of an arbitrary character and you know lots of modern people think well how could you believe in a God like that and it's like when I read that I think well that the Old Testament people that is how they thought they thought you better look the hell out because life is really difficult and if you step out line you're going to get flattened and God doesn't care in some sense whether you approve of him it's like what the hell does that have to do with anything obviously you don't approve it's like you better pay attention though because otherwise you're going to be in real trouble and not there's real wisdom and that Nietzsche thought that it need to really admire the Old Testament that's a work of literature because he thought that the representation of the divine let's say as a representation of the essential nature of being was extraordinarily accurate in its arbitrary and often cruel nature you know it wasn't following a morality that human beings could really understand as moral he thought that was very realistic and I like that interpretation but what happens in the New Testament is quite interesting because there's an insistence all of a sudden in the New Testament that you're supposed to act towards God as if he's nothing but good and that's such a strange thing because you know you look at the world it you think we're yeah really just good a well the cancer and the earthquakes is kind of hard to fit into that picture and you know the terrible things that happen to children and all about is very difficult to square with the notion of a good God obviously but then there's the other underlying idea is that if you act in that manner it makes it more likely to be true it's something like that and so it's that I would consider that in some sense and active both courage and faith it's like you're going to make the case like God makes at the beginning of the Bible that being is in fact good now you can't see it because well you get to see all the things about it that aren't so good that's not the point it's a metaphysical presupposition something like that it's a it's a decision to act that way I'm going to act as if being is good and to further that and then the implicit idea is well there isn't anything that there isn't any way that you can make things work out better than to do that and so there's a courageous element to it which i think is also expressed to some degree in the idea of Christ's like voluntary sacrifice of his own life his presupposition was something like I'm going to act as if God is good and I'm going to play that out right to the end and now that becomes something like a divine pattern and I believe there's wisdom in that because again I most of the time that I've been wrestling with this sort of thing I've always been looking at the opposite I haven't been studying good I've been studying evil because evil is easier to believe especially after the 20th century it's like I think you have to be you have to be blind not to think about the things that happened in the 20th century as evil and then some of the things that happen we're so brutal it is just absolutely unimaginable and well unless you imagine it and and it's it's it's right there it's part of the historical record it's it and then I think well if there's something that that's it's that terrible it indicates as clearly as anything can that there's also something that's its opposite and that's whatever it is that the farthest away possible from that outcome now that doesn't mean we can exactly say what it is because it's easier to grip in some sense what it means to torture and break and hurt and then not to be able to conceptualize so clearly how you would have to act if you were acting in the exact opposite manner but at least it implies that it exists and I see that pattern being laid out in this dreamlike manner in the New Testament and it has something to do with well it has something to do and this is for sure with the voluntary acceptance of mortality because of course that's the poisoned apple right the fact that everybody looks forward into the future to know that you're finite and so is everything that you love and it's very difficult for that not to poison your existence and well there's no getting out of it as far as we can tell but there might be something like switching your attitude to it and you could say well that's the price you pay for being and the heroic thing to do is to accept that and not even to accept it grudgingly to say alright I'm going to go along with that I'm going to accept that and I'm going to act nonetheless as if being is good and then I'm going to see how things turn out it's something like that and God saw that it was good and so it's an act of courage right there there's an act of courage that's associated with that transformation of attitude and even with regards to the notion that the world is good it's a courageous attitude especially given that there's so much evidence that makes that conclusion difficult to continually draw but the alternative seems to me to be far worse so there's God again with the Sun behind him because he's associated with the solar consciousness and he's creating all these strange wonderful creatures and and you know it's a and people say well you know the idea of God as a an old man in the sky let's say that's primitive it's much more better to think about it as a much more better Jesus anyways it's more sophisticated to think to think of the divine essence as a disembodied spirit or something like that but you know that's not so that's not so obvious either because as I already pointed out there isn't anything that's more complicated than a human being and and so the idea that the divine is something that's at least as complicated as a human being strikes me as something that's actually quite reasonable and I know it's a metaphor although I don't know to what degree it is a metaphor and it's also something that's embodied and I really that's also a very interesting notion you know because it's become increasingly obvious as we tried to do such things as produce artificial intelligence that it's very difficult to produce an intelligence or perhaps a consciousness that isn't embodied in some manner it can't be just it can't be just a spirit the spirit without form and I think that's part of the reason to why Christianity put so much emphasis at the end of time on the resurrection of the body because there's there's a there's a drive in there to e Noble to ennoble the idea of the body not just the spirit the consciousness that floats abstractly above the body but to say that no you can't do that you can't just shed that part of you that's heavy and material so to speak and leave it behind as if it's of no value you have to be Noble and Noble that as well and that idea is also linked to the note to the representation of God as as a human being and as a wise human being and as something that's embodied and so at least from the metaphorical perspective I don't think it's reasonable just to to brush your hands across it and say well that's that's primitive because I don't think it is I don't think it's primitive at all and then God said let us make man in our image after our likeness and it's our because well this is a this is part of the priestly story there's as I said a number of sources for the Old Testament and in the priestly version if I remember correctly its Elohim that may be wrong doesn't matter but the precisely it doesn't matter because the notion is is that the God who's in the background of this story has a kind of plurality of being right and it looks like the idea of monotheism arose with great difficulty across time because there are lots of powers and the idea that there's a power of powers was something that it wasn't easy for people to figure out you know in it because what what constant across sources of power or some kind of meta power but it's hard to figure out what that is and that's what's being represented by by the movement as far as I can tell from polytheism to monotheism it's it's the first the observation that there are powers that determine the destiny of people at least in part that you that you're subject to and then the idea that there's something common across all those powers that you can represent partly say with the idea of the Sun rising in the morning and fighting its way out of the darkness at night and that that's associated with consciousness and sovereignty is very very see one of the things that bothers me about simple-minded atheism and I would say the simple-minded atheism is of the sort that regards these stories as nothing but simple superstitions is that it's very very poorly informed because whatever these stories are they're not merely simple superstitions they weren't conjured up by some cabal of priests to bamboozle the masses even though they were used for that purposes from time to time it's much much more complicated than that they have a very ancient lineage and they're tied together with all sorts of other stories and there's there's an emergent wisdom in them and I think the right way to view them is as the birthplace of sophisticated philosophical ideas and so you have to wrestle with these stories you can't just and I said already that I'm going to be as rational as I possibly can in my discussion of these stories and not refer to anything metaphysical except when that's absolutely necessary even though I don't want to eliminate the possibility of a metaphysical reality because I think that's premature but but you have to take the story seriously if you're going to if you're if you're going to if you're going to approach the problem properly you can't just casually dismiss them it's not appropriate and so so let us make man in our image that's a very interesting idea and like I said it's not easy to understand how it was that human beings came up with the idea that us lowly creatures were so it with the Mesopotamians for example and the Greeks were like this to human beings weren't godlike they were the playthings of the gods right they were they were just the gods just tortured us for their amusement you know love and hatred and anger and all those powerful forces we were just you're just playthings to the gods there wasn't anything particularly divine about us the notion that in some sense we partake of the divine that's a staggering idea and you don't want to under underestimate the difficulty that there was in abstracting that or the utility of that idea for our current mode of being let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth so God created man in his own image in the image of God he created him male and female he created them that's interesting because there is more than one creation story in Genesis and in this story males and females are basically created at the same time later Eve is extracted out of Adam and we'll talk about that but not here it's the two sexes are generated simultaneously and they both carry within them the divine stamp which is very egalitarian and very appropriate and I think unbelievably advanced that that's what it looks like to me and God blessed them well that's a good thing and God said to them be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth and there's God creating Adam and Eve and they're looking pretty happy about the whole thing and that's Michelangelo's famous Sistine Chapel representation and there's some cool things about this I mean you got to wonder this this is a side and I don't know if it's a credible side but it's an interesting aside so that's that's a form of credible what the hell is God doing in this thing now I mean what is this exactly and and so there's been some interesting answers to that and this is one of them so there was a group of scientists about 20 years ago that that were remarked on the precise the precise analogy between this structure and the brain bisected down the middle and of course Michelangelo was one of the first people who did detailed dissections and so they felt that that that Michelangelo had put God inside the brain for some reason and that seems to me to be associated with the notion that there's you know there's a there's an analogy or metaphorical identity between the notion of whatever God is and the structures that give rise to consciousness and I think we really underestimate the degree to which consciousnesses is both say miraculous and and not understood I mean you know you you have what appears to be an entirely material substrate yet here you are aware itself aware and able to generate the world merely in some sense by looking at it it really is remarkable and that consciousness is dependent on on something that Wells up from deep within that material substrate that we don't understand at all it's it's really a crazily remarkable thing you know and you hear you hear a lot about scientific reductionism but I'll tell you something that's kind of interesting in this it's a tangent to you know the guy that discovered DNA I think it was Watson and just walks in and Crick but I don't remember who wrote this book but one of them I don't remember which one he believed the DNA was so complicated that it had to come from space he didn't believe it could have possibly evolved on earth and so like a lot of these people who are used as exemplars of scientific reductionism aren't like that at all when you actually read what they had to say right they they were very aware of the limits of their own knowledge and I mean DNA is something really quite spectacular Lee remarkable it's an eternal substance it's been around for a very long time and the idea that we understand it is a very stupid idea and I would say that I would say that the same thing applies to the brain like where we're scratching away at the surface of something we don't understand at all so it's quite interesting I think that and it maybe Michelangelo had enough gall to do that it's certainly possible I mean he had enough gall to do dissections when the when the cost of that was death you know he had this robbed corpses essentially to go and do it so he was he wasn't I would say not particularly politically correct so so that's kind of interesting and there's another representation of the same thing and that's a funny one I had to throw that in I don't know how many of you know this but there's there's there's this joke in the atheistic atheist community I think it might have be started by Richard Dawkins but that might be wrong that it was just as reasonable to believe in the Flying Spaghetti Monster as it was to believe in God into that's a Flying Spaghetti Monster by the way and and and so that's that's called cuts by his noodly appendage and anyways it's fine it's not very sophisticated but it is funny so and God blessed them and God said to them be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heaven and over every living thing that moves on the earth and God said behold I have given you every plant yielding seed that is on the face of all the earth and every tree with seed in its fruit you shall have them from for food and every beast of the earth and every bird of the heavens and to everything that creeps on the earth everything that has the breath of life I have given every green plant for food and it was so and God saw everything he had made and behold it was very good and there was evening and there was morning the sixth day thus the heavens and the earth were finished and all the host of them and on the seventh day God finished his work that he had done and he rested on the seventh day from all his work that he had done so God blessed the seventh day and made it holy because on it God rested from all his work that he had done in creation I like that - you know one of the why did a lot of counseling work with people who were coaching work I guess with people who were fairly spectacular ly successful and they were usually workaholics you know they're the sort of people that were like they work 80 hours a week non-stop that's just what they were like and one of the things we were always trying to figure out was well how much should you work because one answer is you just work till you die right I mean he just exhaust yourself and well that's not that's not a good idea and then you have to figure out why that isn't a good idea it's got to be something like this is that you don't want to do so much work that the amount of work you do interferes with the amount of work that you could still do right because if you work like mad for two weeks and then you like you have to lie in a hospital bed for a month that obviously isn't very productive so you have to figure out how much you can work diligently and then how much you have to recuperate so that you can get back up and work again and you know that's people have basically settled on something like this and given it the divine imprimatur that that's one way of thinking about it which is well you can toil away for six days and no wonder because you have to work but you should rest at least one day out of seven otherwise well you don't appreciate life that might be part of it and plus I think it's more a matter of iterative durability you know because one of the things that defines morality is the capacity to repeat something right so if something is properly structured in a moral manner then you can do it over and over and over again without any degeneration and so that's kind of like a relationship if your relationship is negotiated you can continue to negotiate it and then you can have a relationship that lasts for a long time you can do it today and next week and next month the next year you could maintain it across time and this I would say is the wisdom that's been a so that's been garnered over god only knows what period of time to say well look I mean even God needed to take a break and appreciate what was going on and it's not such a bad thing for people to follow that that pattern and that's a good thing for modern people to know because we seem to be even though you know we're very wealthy by historical standards our capacity to relax isn't exactly what it could be and I think that's really hard on people okay so I'm going to go over again the idea of the attributes of God I talked about that a little bit last week but I want to return to it because I think it's worth it's worth dwelling on a little bit because we're trying to figure out what it is that people were trying to formulate when they were formulating these representations and we sort of come to the conclusion that they're there there's an attempt to abstract out the nature of power from specific aspects of power and there's some attempt to associate that with consciousness as that which gives rise to being itself and there's some attempt to associate that consciousness with something that has a cosmic quality whatever that might mean and and it's a statement that it has a cosmic quality rather than rather than a discovery it's a mere statement that there's that there's something about consciousness that has world generating significance and also the implication that it's associated with human beings as well very and it's a very interesting set of propositions and I don't believe that they're simply refutable like it's a perfectly coherent argument even though it's primarily made metaphorically and so then once again I want to build up the the framework of associations around the idea of God one of the things that Freud did when he was interpreting dreams and it's quite useful you know so if someone comes to me with a dream then I have them tell me the whole dream and then I get them to repeat it line by line and then whenever they say a line and it there's an object in it or a person or something like that I ask them what that makes them remember or what that thing means to them or what comes to mind and that's the associational technique and it's predicated on the idea that your memory works by association and you know that if you're daydreaming you know you go from one thing to another like a conversation does and that you can take an idea that's at the center of a web of associations and by attracting the associations you can kind of zero in on what the idea might need and then you expanded that by trying to he called it to amplify the dream by thinking about about narrative or literary or mythological similarities that that might be associated with the narrative structure of the dream and and I think often that can be unbelievably useful you know and it's like the dream is an idea that's trying to come to birth it's partly formulated and then if you discuss it and amplify it it's like you can speed along its transformation into a more articulated idea and the dream is also something that because your brain your mind is trying to with one foot in the unknown it's trying to formulate what's out there in the unknown and to make it concrete but but it doesn't do that in one fell swoop it doesn't just take potential and turn it into two articulated ideas it has to dream up what's out there first projects its imagination out there to get a handle on what it might be it then that's presented in the dream and if you analyze the dream you can make it more articulate and so that's what we're going to do with the attributes of God to build up the representational structure a little bit so so the hypothesis is that God is an abstracted ideal formulated in large part to dissociate the ideal from any particular incarnation or man or ruler and the underlying idea there too is that when the ruler becomes the ideal the state turns into the biblical Egypt and the biblical Egypt is a tyranny and so there's a very very solid idea in the Old Testament that I think took people god only knows how long to figure out that if you transformed if you confuse the notion of sovereign sovereignty with the current sovereign then your culture immediately degenerated into totalitarian state and turned to stone and that was deadly then you were slaves and then the thing was going to collapse as well like no matter how big and grandiose as soon as the ruler became the concrete incarnation of the ideal there was no distinction between the man and the divine notion of the ideal then the society was doomed and I think that that's a less I think that's what I think that's true it's just as simple as that and I think we saw more than enough evidence of that in the 20th century and we're certainly seeing the same thing repeating itself now when the ruler becomes the ideal the state turns into the biblical Egypt and the biblical Egypt is the archetypal tyranny so what is God like well from the Christian perspective there's three elements one is seems to have something to do with tradition and so that's God the Father and that's partly the embodiment I would say of the human being because that's an ancient ancient thing and it's also partly the embodiment of the tradition of human beings which is also a very ancient thing and that's the structure as I said it's the structure that consciousness emerges from that enables us to grapple with the unknown as such and then there's there's the the intermediary between that and and Christ say that's the holy spirit that's that bird and that's that's the spirit in a more abstracted sense and I would say that's probably as close as Christianity ever got to the notion of consciousness as such you know disembodied consciousness something like that and then there's the notion of the suffering individual and and that's that's a very complicated idea and it's something like in order for so there's this idea an old idea and I believe this was originally a Jewish idea that a something with the attributes of God omniscience omnipresence and omnipotent lacks something so it's like a Zen koan it's a really interesting idea what won the world can something like that lack and the idea is limitation so something that's everything lacks limitation and that's got that idea like when I first encountered that just blew me away I thought it was such a such a brilliant brilliant realization that there are advantages to not being able to do things because partly because it gives you something to do I suppose that's that's a big part of it right is if you had everything you wanted that at every moment at your fingertips well that that's there's there's nothing there's no story and it's funny you know because that happened to Superman you know the the cartoon character by the 1980s he could juggle planets and you could bounce like hydrogen bombs off him and be fine and it's like everyone got bored because well what we're going to do to Superman like you love a hydrogen bomb atom and he just brushes it off and like combs his hair and that's the end of that and the whole cartoon series basically died because he didn't have any flaws there's no story without the limitation and I think that's an absolutely remarkable idea and so part of the notion of Christ and this is something that I puzzled over for a long time and I learned a lot of this from young is that there's IDN Christianity that there's consciousness as such which which in some sense is eternal it stretches from the beginning of the time to the end of time but it's this abstracted notion but it lacks a certain kind of reality because it's not instantiated somewhere not it's not instantiated in a specific time and place in history and so the idea of the Sun that the third part of the Trinity or one of the three parts of the Trinity is the notion that tradition and consciousness as such also has to be embedded in history in a particular time in place and so there's the archetypal embeddedness and that would be the Incarnation and that's the perfect man right who accepts his mortality and acts in a virtuous manner but it's in a it's a it's the archetypal story of every individual as well and you know there's a very strong strain in Christianity I would say this is more pronounced in Orthodox Christianity that the that the purpose of that the proper path of life is to take the tradition let's say and the spirit that's associated with consciousness as such and to act it out in your life in your own personal life in a manner that's analogous to the manner in which Christ acted out in his life and what that means in part is the acceptance of the tragic preconditions of existence and so that's partly betrayal right betrayal by friends and by family and by the state and it's partly punishment for our sins that you did not commit as well as the ones you did commit and sometimes that's just a relief but you know the arbitrary nature of justice and also the fact of finitude and the notion is is that your duty let's say and the way to set things right in the cosmos is to accept that as a necessary precondition for being and to act virtuously despite that and that's a very very powerful idea as far as I'm concerned and I'm also you know the world is a weird place and I've seen some very strange things in my life and one of the things that I've seen is that you know I've dealt with some people who are very let's say that they weren't on a good path let's put it that way and one of the things that was really interesting about being around people like that it was like almost like they were surrounded by a gravitational field of sorts I'm speaking metaphorically obviously and their worldview was so warped and twisted that if you came within contact of them you all of a sudden started to play a part in their drama and it was almost inevitable they would maneuver and manipulate and interpret in a way that made you into the villain in their story no matter what it was that you wanted to do and unless you've encountered something like that and many of you probably have you don't know how powerful a pole that is and so it's certainly possible that someone can act in a like like like a gravitational odd object and bend things around them to fit their narrative they're unhappy and tragic narratives but I've seen the officer - you know we're people who were aiming upward with the best of their ability and because of that they had a positive effect on the people around them and and that that that that and that ordered things around them in profound ways and I think it's an open question the degree to which the cosmos would order itself around you properly if you got yourself together as much as you could get yourself together like I mean we know that things can go very very badly wrong if you if you do things very badly wrong there's no doubt about that but the converse is also true if you start to sort yourself out properly and then you have a beneficial effect on your family first of all that's going to echo down the generations but it also spreads out into the community and we are networked together you know we're not lit we're not associated linearly we all affect each other and so it's an open question the degree to which acting out the notion of the notion that being is good and the notion that you can accept its limitations and that you should still strive for virtue it's it's an open question how profound effect that would have on the structure of reality if you really chose to act it out and I've seen things as I said in my life that indicate that I do believe there's a metaphysical element to life as well as the rational practical element and I think there are times when those two things come together and I've seen that happen and so I don't think we know the limits of virtue I don't think we know what true virtue could bring about if we if we aimed at it carefully and practically and so the notion that there's something divine about the individual who accepts the conditions of existence and still strives for the good I think that that's a idea that's very much worth paying attention to and I think the fact that people have considered that idea for at least 2,000 years quite seriously is also an indication that there's there's at least something to be thought about with in relationship to that so that's kind of the trinitarian idea same idea there and you see this is it's interesting too because you have here you have God the Father essentially who's coming out of this strange you see this isn't the sky exactly and you see this very often in these old pictures it's not exactly the sky whatever the heaven was that that the people believed in it's something that's it's like the sky opens and there's a dimension beyond the sky it's something like that and I want to show you this too just to show you that this isn't only a Western conception you know when it has something to do with mystic experience because there's there's a bar to satisfy it kind of looks like he has a hat but that's not a hat that's a whole bunch of bodhisattva's going back to Eternity right and this hole in the sky here is like a hole into time and these things are recurring across time it's the eternal recurrence of this of this redemptive archetype and the sky opens up and and you can see that thing recurring and recurring and recurring same ideas basically that's the blue Buddha who's a healing who's a healing entity sitting in a mandala which is like a representation of paradise and it's the same idea it's like reality opens up and reveals this image of perfection and so it's a well it's a universal conception and and well I think it's a representation of the possibility of the metaphysical and the physical coming together and in some sort of in some sort of communication it's something like that anyways and I mean you have to remember that there's absolutely no doubt that people have metaphysical and religious experiences that's an absolute fact you can induce them chemically you can deduce them electrochemically lots of people who have epilepsy have epileptic prodromus that are associated with divine enlightenment so does the S key for example he had he had epilepsy and that was really I think one of the things that made him a great author because and Dostoyevsky would have this feeling that he was going to have an epileptic seizure and he said that the feeling for him was that the world was opening up and he was becoming more and more and more enlightened and he was just on the verge of grasping the essence of existence and then he'd have an epileptic seizure and for the subjective feeling was that that much knowledge was just too much for him to bear well you know you can say well that was a neurological abnormality and fine you know but God he was Dostoyevsky you know and so you can't just brush that off so yeah well so that's the Trinitarian idea fundamentally and if this notion here is the notion that well the crosses crosses a funny thing because the cross marks the center you know and it's an X and the X is the center of the world like the X that the Cathedral is and it's the center of the world it's where you are because as a consciousness you're the center of the world and that center of the world is a place of betray no and suffering in limitation that's that's exactly what it is and the question is well given that and given the fact that you know it what the hell are you supposed to do about it and what that represents I believe that's coil with that representation implies is that you're supposed to voluntarily accept that and then move forward um well in good faith and with courage that's the notion and that you're supported you're supported by your tradition and that's why you need your tradition to that's why you need to be embedded in your tradition because without that without the support let's say of your father and I mean that both practically and metaphysically without that behind you without the knowledge of you as a both a biological and the cultural creature without that depth of knowledge you can't hey you don't have the courage to do it because you don't know what you are what you could be and so without that because you're a historical creature you know what students ask me sometimes why study history it's like well because history is about you that's why it's like history tells you who you are you can't tell who you are because you only live a little while how the hell can you figure out who you are so you need all this collected wisdom and all this dream like information and all this mythology and all this narrative to inform you about what you are beyond what you see of yourself and you know you're pummeled down and people picked on you and there's 50 things about you that are horrible and you know you've got a self-esteem problem you're sort of hunched over and you've got all these problems you know and so it's not easy to see let's say the divinity that lurks behind that and unless you're aware of the heroic stories of the past and the metaphysics of consciousness let's say I don't think that you can have the courage to regard yourself as the sort of creature that can stand up underneath that intense existential burden and move forward in encourage and grace and of course that's part of the reason that I'm talking about these biblical stories and it's nine-thirty so we're going to have to stop okay so we're going to stop exactly at 10:00 tonight because that that's the deal with the theater people and so and besides I'll be out of anything intelligent to say by that point certainly so while it needs to go through one story so that was good okay let's give everyone like to you know just a few seconds to settle down and and everyone who wants to leave can leave so thank you for all for coming by the way I'm constantly amazed at this you know everybody comes and listens to this because you know it's just well strange let's put it that way so so far it's been fun though so that's good okay let's go I hope that works hi dr. Pearson I was a raised Catholic and anytime there was a bit of a an inherent contradiction let's call it in the document to the Bible it would be referred to as a mystery and there's one mystery I've always kind of wondered about and it's very important to Genesis how do you how do you deal with a perfect God or the conception of a perfect God who by nature is incapable of an imperfect design sorry are incapable of a perfect design so what I mean by that is many religions present for example good and evil as separate deities that pre-existed simultaneously what's interesting though Christianity is that Lucifer the embodiment of evil in the Christian religion is an outgrowth of God and is sometimes Milton for example presents him as a rebel against his interpretation of God's tyranny right another example you know we had didn't touch on even today but in Paradise a supposedly perfect Garden a perfect design is infiltrated again by that evil outgrowth of a so-called perfect God so from a psychological perspective do you think there's a significance to this presentation of perfection yet the contradictory flaws that are sort of naturally part of that perfection quote-unquote oh so good that's a good simple question we're starting good see young Carl young he was kind of manichaean in his approach and he tended towards thinking that evil in some sense was a separate entity you know and I thought about that for a long time because there's a potency about evil that just can't be brushed way and I mean I mean this most practically as I've said for people in my clinical practice I've dealt with many people who are touched by malevolence and there's no other way of stating it properly and this happens a lot to people who have post-traumatic stress disorder like they encountered someone that wanted to hurt them for the sake of hurting them you know it wasn't some misunderstanding you can forget about that it wasn't that at all and so to to deny the reality of evil in some sense I think is the ultimate in naivety even though it's a word that you won't hear used for example very often in universities anymore but that I just thought just I just can't understand that at all but but I thought about that a lot and and so I'm going to kind of answer that question by hitting it scattershot the first thing is is that there's an idea and that this happens in Milton this cut that comes across in Milton that distance from God is hell right that hell doesn't actually have any I know it's ambivalent in Milton but but the fundamental claim seems to be that the farther you get from God the more it's hell and then there's another idea that Milton's Satan who's Lucifer the bringer of light right he's God's highest angel gone most wrong and I kind of think about him as the spirit of rationality of intelligence it's not because I'm not an admirer of intelligence because hurray for intelligence but one of the things that that Milton seemed to cotton onto before the rise of modern totalitarian States was that intellect has the capacity to fall in love with its own creations and to elevate them to the highest place which is basically a totalitarian claim it's like what I know is everything that needs to be known and if it was only manifest in the world the world would become a utopia and I also think that we'll talk about this next week I also think that that's the core idea behind the Tower of Babel remember the Tower of Babel is raised by human beings so that the pinnacle will hit heaven and so it's the idea that we can build a structure that makes the transcendent unnecessary and so ok so there's those two things then there's there's an idea of free will that's associated with it too and it seems to me that in order for there to be good there has to be evil and so I I think the answer is something like this is that in order for there to be being there has to be limitation in order for their good to be good there has to be the possibility of evil I think the right path is to exist such that the possibility of evil remains open but that you choose the good and I don't think that evil per se is built into the structure of the world I do think that that's human I think that evil is human and I think it's understandable I did a lecture that's online about the distinction between evil and tragedy and tragedy seems to be built into the structure of the world and perhaps you can blame God for that I mean it doesn't seem to me that it's your fault that there earthquakes for example but but it is all not obvious to me either that it's tragedy that takes the spirit out of people I think that human beings are actually equipped to deal with tragedy but we're not equipped to deal with malevolence that destroys people and so I think that I think that metaphysically speaking the world is structured so that people have a choice between good and evil and that so then the next question is why do we have a choice and that that's where my knowledge runs out I don't I don't like the alchemists for example speculated that and then the Orthodox Christians also followed this line of reasoning is that human beings in some sense are furthering creation by our actions and by our choices and I think there's something to that it's like it's like creation is unfinished in some sense and that we're participating in in moving it in whatever direction we it is that we want to move it and part of that is that we have freewill and part of that is that we have the choice between good and evil and that's also it's all associated with with the significance maybe the cosmic significance of our lives and I blood that strikes me as plausible and and I think that the weight of responsibility that people feel existentially is an indication of that so that's about the best I could do with that so and it seems the way you're describing it it's built into at least the text that you presented because one of the other things I had noticed was God consistently describes creation as good right well rates light it's good he creates dark it's good laughter he creates things in ounces that he creates man and woman and announces that they have dominion ya over those things and can use them yeah and it might be something lost the translation but that is described as very good as soon as that Dominion is brought into it yes yeah it might speak to that notion of furthering yeah great and here's something interesting too and we'll develop this a lot is that you see when Adam and Eve eat the fruit the snake gives them the fruit the first thing that happens is their eyes are opened okay and to me that means that while they've woken up right there's been an increment in their consciousness and the next thing that happens is that they recognize that they're naked okay and to recognize that you're naked is to recognize that you're vulnerable and human beings are strange creatures it because most animals are like this and they're protected but not us like our most vulnerable parts are displayed for harm and for everyone to observe right so we've got that sort of bipedal self-consciousness built into us but what's really interesting is that when Adam and Eve realized that they're naked it's the same moment that they know the difference between good and evil and that our God that just that just I just ground away on that for years trust so what the hell's what's going on here what's the relationship between consciousness knowledge of nakedness and the knowledge of good and evil and then I think I think I figured it out I think I think it was that you see when you know that you're vulnerable and they also develop knowledge of death right so there's deep knowledge of vulnerability and they get embarrassed about that they cover themselves up right so that's culture so it's a very profound shock for them to recognize that they're naked it even makes Adam hide from God many developed the knowledge of good and evil well I think it's because you see human beings have this peculiar capacity that no other creature has which is I know how I can be hurt because I'm aware of my own limitations painfully aware and now because I know how I can be hurt I know how you can be hurt and I can take advantage of that and that's I think how evil enters the world that's what it looks like to me it's like I got this expansion of knowledge it says in Genesis that that that gives people another attribute of divinity knowing the difference between good and evil it has nothing to do with animals and nothing to do with Adam and Eve prior to having your eyes open but that the cosmos switches when that self consciousness manifests itself and that's when the possibility of evil enters the world it's something like that and that's also echoed by the intimate relationship between the snake in the Garden of Eden and Satan which is we're going to because that's what that's a very strange associations like this snake also becomes the adversary of being and I think that's I'll jump very quickly into that but I think that's because you know there's the snake that bites you in the jungle and then there's the snake that lives in your enemy and then there's the snake that lives in your family if you if you banish the enemy to the Netherlands and then there's the snake that lives in you if you remove yourself from your family and that snake that's in you right that's that's a that's a psychological phenomena that's equivalent to transcendent evil itself the thing that inhabits every single person that's why there's that association between the snake and Satan and that's why I think that people have this it's associated with their knowledge of ulnar ability that gives us this constant capacity for for evil being imagine if your medieval torturer you know I mean people don't generally imagine that sort of thing but but but people were maybe evil torturers and they were very good at what they did and the only way that you could be a torturers to know what would hurt you right and so you exploit your own vulnerable exploit the knowledge of your own vulnerability to bring pain into the world and I don't think that you can lay that precisely at God's feet now people have been arguing about that for a very long time but but my question the question for me that arose from that is all right fine like tragedy you can lay that at God's feet well if we didn't bring additional evil into the world could we tolerate the tragedy of being without becoming corrupt and I think generally the answer to that is yes because I've seen people react quite heroically to the arbitrary burdens of their life but malevolence may I'm not late that lays them low it lays them low and it seems to be to be nothing but a destructive force and I do believe as well and I think you see this in the Cain and Abel story that the root of malevolence is the desire for revenge against God for for creation itself and I mean I've read terrible things written by terrible people trying to get to the bottom of things and I mentioned to call them bunny killers for example and it's clear all you have to do is go read what they wrote what they were doing was taking revenge against God they knew that if it wasn't unconscious that they've been dwelling on this for months plotting their revenge and it was revenge against being itself for the crime of being so thank you hi doctor you'd said the when God saw that it was good you read that as potentially well I might be better than nothing and the story in Genesis it's bracketed by days which aren't necessarily literal days young the original word you know but it's also bracketed by and he saw it was good you know at the end of the day so my question is is there something more profoundly happening there between this profundity of speaking into existence the way you know the start is to this observation the seeing that it's good and are we is God modeling consciousness is there a little more there for us to grapple with okay so so more for us to grapple with in what way in the sense that we have this amazing this insight of speaking things forth but you'd also comment on consciousness as until something's observed or until so there until it's seen so when God sees that that creation was good is there there's kind of this bracketing between the bringing forth through the spoke we you know through the word through Jesus okay okay that's good I see what you mean okay well I think I think what that is is that I think okay so it's perfectly reasonable from an archetypal and psychological perspective to consider the idea of the word equivalent to the spoken truth I mean price makes that claim in the New Testament that he's the truth right and embodied and so then you can logically you can derive from that the idea that if things are spoken into being through truth then they're good and so yeah I think that that association exists and I think that that's well I also think that that's that's that in some sense the deepest claim of faith I believe that because I think that I think you have to make a decision in your life as far as I can tell and I think Kierkegaard knew this more clearly than anyone else I've ever read and that is that if being is good then an honest relationship with being also has to be good and then if you have an honest relationship with being then you're going to speak the truth and then I think what you have to decide is that speaking if you speak the truth then what happens is good regardless of what happens and that that's that that's the rub of faith and I think that's something that Kerry could guard wrestled with you know and I mean I'm trying to think if I can provide an example about about that and anything and easily and quickly well I guess it's partly because it's partly because you can live your life two ways you can you can you can use your language to manipulate you can use your language as a tool to get what you want but the problem with that is that that assumes that you know what you want and that you're right and that's a problem because there's lots of things you don't know and if you get what you want you may find a that you didn't really want it and be that you're not the person that started the journey towards that that happens a lot to people especially when they use their language in a manipulative way and so the alternative seems to be and I think this is one of the lessons for example that's laid out in the movie Pinocchio which happens to be a kind of archetypal favorite of mine is but part of the act of faith so let's say and then I wouldn't say Christian faith necessarily I would say faith in being itself is is the decision it's like the decision that God is good the decision is there's no better way to bring better being into being than to speak the truth and I do think that's accurate I think that's a very wise observation I think that's echoed in that for story first of all the active speech and second the observation that the consequence was good so yeah yeah thank you good morning citizen Peterson first I have a bunch of questions and the one that have them answered immediately like you have a post on Quora in which you encourage all children to incur skateboarding injuries but but also stated in this post well you wrote that do not try to rescue someone who does not want to be rescued and be very careful about rescuing someone who does and can you reconcile this with what you stated about transcendent morality and the heroic impulse that I guess men are supposed to be born with ok ok ok so while the skates the skateboarding question is I wrote I have a book coming out in 2018 called 12 rules for life and antidote to chaos and one of the chapters in there is from that Korra posting and it's called don't bother children when they're skateboarding and it's sort of associated with what I'd said earlier about parkour for example is that you know kids need to go out and push themselves against danger because that's what life is is pushing yourself against danger and and when you see kids doing things that are dangerous but spectacular then you kind of have a moral obligation to back the hell off and let them experiment with their own mortality because you can't keep them safe the best thing you can do is make them able and courageous and I would say that that's a more difficult lesson generally speaking for mothers to learn than for fathers to learn and that was Freud's fundamental observation but it's it's absolutely crucial and so I've seen kids do I mean you know you can obviously be a fool on the skateboard although the distinction between being a fool and developing yourself is not as clear as people might like to imagine and and when kids are out there with no helmets and doing dangerous things it's like there's a part of me that of course is very worried about it but there's another part of me that admires it very much because they're practicing what they need to practice in order to cope with the world ok so there's that now the other one was risky and evil yeah well I got this partly from Carl Rogers you know because Rogers was either clinician very famous clinician and and he he was he was a Christian missionary to begin with but he didn't end up that way but he was very interested in the utility of listening as a as a means of redemption essentially and listening by the way is if you have someone that you know that has a problem the best thing you can often do is listen to them if they're actually trying to communicate because people configure themselves through speech and most people can't think and I don't mean that in a mean way I mean the way they think is by talking and they can't talk unless they have someone to talk to and it's partly because they're bouncing the idea off them and seeing if it makes sense and seeing how the person responds so listening is a great thing but Rogers was also interested in the in the preconditions for having a redemptive relationship and that could be a therapeutic relationship or an intimate relationship and one of the things he claimed was that unless the person was aiming upward there was nothing you could do about it that and that seemed to be associated with this idea of that initial choice say between good and evil and saying when someone comes to therapy they've already done something they've already said I have a problem conceivably I could fix it and I need to do something about it and then so half the work is already done by the time they show up because they've already said well things aren't as good as they could be and I could do something about it the question is can you do anything about someone who isn't at that state and my observation and this is Rogers observation as well is that you can't I think you can serve by example but until the person has decided on their own that they're wrong that's why they're suffering if there's something wrong about what they're doing and that they want to fix it I don't I think that even trying to hammer against that often makes it worse so and I know that Solzhenitsyn when he was talking about the communist ideologue the really hardcore communist ideologue that were eaten up by the Gulag Archipelago system you know sort of devoured by their own he saw the same thing was that until they were willing to admit that something was wrong with the manner in which they had construed the world that it had resulted in their own demise that there was actually no way of communicating with them they're in kind of an authoritarian bubble and so so I I don't think that so even if you orient yourself as an archetypal hero there's no way you can get through that barriers well I think that that's part of the issue of free will I think that I do not think that people can learn unless they admit that they're wrong there was this there's this play the cocktail hour by TS Eliot and he has this woman in the play and she comes up to a psychiatrist and she says just in the course of casual conversation she says I really hope there's something wrong with me and of course the psychiatrist is a bit taken aback by that he says well why in the world would you hope such a thing and she says something like well like I'm suffering then things are not good for me I'm having a dreadful time of it as far as I can tell there's only two possibilities either the world in its essence is conspiring against me and I'm doomed because what am I going to do about the world like it's just built into the structure of reality or I'm doing something wrong so I'm really hoping that I'm doing something wrong because if I am then maybe I could fix it and I'd stop suffering and it's it's something like that and see it's also I think that if your life isn't what it could be and you're suffering then it seems to me that that should be sufficient evidence that you don't know enough and with if that isn't sufficient evidence that you don't know enough then I don't know how anyone else can provide you without evidence and so I'm going to leave it at that this is psychological rescue not like the rescuing someone who's drowning for example you can rescue people when they're drowning even if they don't want perfect I'll tell you something about that though something interesting about that and that's relevant but you know I don't know how many of you know how you rescue someone who's drowning you do it like this right you come to them like this and you push them away with your foot if they're I'm telling you that's what you do if you're a lifeguard because if they're panicking and they grab you you both drown and that's stupid because then you both drown right and so and that's a really good way that's a really good metaphor for trying to help someone - it's like when people are in real trouble you know some of it's they're confused and some of it is that their life is collapsed around them and there's some malevolence there and there's some desire for vengeance like one dangerous mess and if you're going to wait in there unprepared the probability that they're going to take you down compared to you elevating them is very very high you know because you don't even know what your damn psychological stability rests on you might be saying just because you're lucky and surrounded by sane people that doesn't mean that you have the psychological wherewithal to really post someone up from the depths of the underworld especially if they've also got one foot in hell so you should bloody well be careful about doing that kind of thing it's it's hubristic to attempt it and I would you know I would definitely caution people very carefully about trying to rescue someone who doesn't want to be rescued it's it's very dangerous activity and it can easily be counterproductive okay so vote since 2006 I've been trying to figure out like extract the meta the way you've put it of social justice warriors and I think I found it actually they seem to have this behavior where they just they nebulize every standard we have so they take a standard you have that has full of criteria they say what something is is how it is like that's a podium but it has these criteria within event oh sorry they take them they do something called nebulization where they take something of what and they dissolve the criteria such that there is no way to say how it is so you see this now with gender where someone will say their gender but there's no way to get logically from how they can be that gender like how you can be an attack helicopter or a male or a woman or something like that but the thing that came from this and I figured this out when I found about you when I learned about you is that nebulization appears to be the exact opposite process of individuation philosophic the silikal version of into it individual that rests on three premises or three core axioms which is I exist which is an axiom that exists in like an objective that you exist here and then I am which is a reiteration or reading reincarnation of I exist which is basically you have to say I'm right about having existed or else it just falls apart and you have ass which is the question begs from that well if you exist and you're right as what and you're talking about God being the the metaphor of God in Genesis being the a metaphor for the creation of consciousness and it appears that individuation actually fits that triad because if you take adds for example and the as is a it's a predictive aspect when you try to take the subjective and make it object it's you have an idea you test it in reality and time is the ultimate arbiter that determines these things and it changes your understanding the reality it gets it lets you know God it lets you know the objective and then from that point there's the subjective which is supposed to be form from objective reality because you've changed that you know have to sacrifice your old self the old way you saw Jordan Peterson of ten years ago was not who he is now so it gets sacrificed and at the same time you can point back to that guy that Jordan Peterson and say well that guy was wrong and that's the scapegoating of the Sun so the subjective aspect the I am right is the son and the holy spirit which is supposed to lead you to God is the ass and I don't understand the relationship between that in the first part okay so can you just clarify that the social justice aspect and the nebulization oh the social justice is the exact opposite process of individuation that's all it is and it actually occurs that adds if you're a Tad's and you're thinking about what am I you either apply individuation you try to apply cry so you try to find out what you are in reality or we refuse that paradigm and say well look I am I'm always going to be right I'm completely self-righteous and you stomp at that subjective aspect where everything becomes subjective and you ultimately become relativistic and nihilistic so I'm asking have you considered that the Genesis tale and the the creation myth and God is actually the is the process of individuation and the Trinity is actually those three core premises the three axioms that come from that okay I haven't considered that I mean I know that young draw drew a parallel between the idea of the passion for example and the development of human individuality and so there's that that idea is lurking inside the union notion of individuation because it has to do with the voluntary confrontation with mortality and also with evil right as two of the key elements of genuine self realization I haven't considered the metaphorical pathway that you just described so I can't comment on that I'd have to think about that but I could say that one of the things that does disturb me about the ideological battle that's going on right now and I think this is a very deep part of it and this is the part that's a battle against the logos in in derrida's old terms right the fellow go centric West needs to be taken down to its essence is the refusal to engage in precise language and I see that in part for example manifested in the refusal of the people who are criticizing to ever engage me in any debate they don't believe in debate and they don't believe in the in the in the let's say the redemptive power of dialog because mostly what they believe in his power so there's a nebulization in that manner there's this tendency to hide behind what's vague and fog like instead of making things sharp and clear and crystalline and I do think that that's well that's part of the degeneration of a civilization as far as I'm concerned so so you haven't considered that then no it would you please I'll do my best I'll do my best Thanks thank you okay so one this is it one more question and make it quick okay hi dr. Peterson my question is I know you stated in the last lecture that the importance for setting aims in life and to kind of have goals to work towards right so my question was where do you how do you do that if you don't know where you want to go because that's kind of where I got stuck on you're your future off authoring program because yeah okay that's that's a good question that's a really good question I think it's the echoed to some degree in the structure of the biblical stories and in this manner so there's this notion in the Old Testament that morality is following a sequence of prohibitions there's a bunch of bad things you shouldn't do and then basically you're good enough and I think there's wisdom in that I think that's kind of where children start right you I mean I love children and all that but they're they're they're crazy little creatures and they need to be you know civilized and partly what you do is you you lay prohibitions on them and mostly what you're trying to do is lay prohibitions on them for the behaviors that if they manifested would make their life miserable so I have another chapter in this book that I'm writing called don't let your children do anything that makes you dislike them and the idea there is that your your job as a parent is to help your children become the sort of four-year-olds that adults genuinely smile at when they come into a room because that makes the entire social environment both truthful and welcoming and so your job is to make them desirable social beings and a lot of that is prohibition okay and there's this ethical transformation and it happens to some degree in the in the tradition of the in the prophetic tradition where there's a spirit that seemed in some sense to rise above the law but there's a real transformation between the Old Testament and the New Testament because the Old Testament is prohibition and the New Testament is well here's the good things you do once you're more than merely prohibiting yourself from from impulsive sin let's say there's a positive good to be accomplished well you might say well I don't know what the positive good is fair enough man so so this is why this thing that I've said to people to become this crazy internet mean but that's to clean up your room and which which is a lot better more useful than people think it's a lot harder too but does the thing the first thing you do I think and I learned this in part from Solzhenitsyn when he was trying to iron out his soul when he was in the gulag because he was trying to figure out how he got there how he contributed to how he got there you know not Stellan and Hitler even though they were kind of a blade you know but he wasn't much he could do about that I think what you have to do and this is part of humility is you have to look around you within your sphere of influence like the direct sphere of influence and fix the things that announce themselves as in need of repair and those are often small things you know and they can be like your room put it in order because the thing is it isn't exactly so important that your room is in order although it is what's important is that you learn how to distinguish between chaos and order and to be able to act in a manner that produces order and in most households there's a hundred things that could be done to just make it less hideous and horrible and so practicing that is it's a real useful form of meditation and it's also it's also I think it's a divine act because you're taking payoffs and you know if you pay attention even to a room it's so interesting I learned because I've renovated many places now and tried to make them beautiful and one of the things that I really learned is that even if you own a structure unless you've investigated all the nooks and crannies and cleaned them up and put your own imprint on them and made them yours they're not yours the mere fact of physical ownership doesn't make them yours you have to establish a dynamic relationship with the objects before they're actually yours and I think you can you can do something as simple as just sit on your bed and think okay there's probably like five things I could do today so that tomorrow morning is slightly better than this morning was at least or at least I'm not falling behind and those who usually be like having to eat a toad in the morning right it's like it's not going to be something you want to do there'll be things you're trying to avoid there snakes essentially but if you ask yourself like you're asking someone which i think is a form of prayer if you ask yourself instead of telling yourself you know what is it that I could do to set things more right today that I would actually do it's usually some small thing because he's not that disciplined you know then you can go do it and then you you put the world together a little more when you do that and that spreads out but you also put your you also construct yourself into something that's better able to call order forth from chaos and that makes you just incrementally stronger and then the next day you can maybe take on a slightly larger task and like you get the benefit of compound interest if you do that it's a tremendously powerful technique and they think if you do that at some point instead of just having to fix things up that are not good you'll start to get a glimmer of the positive things that you could do you know you did the positive things that you could do that would actually constitute a vision and now that's what I would recommend thank you all right good night I'm really looking forward to this lecture not like I wasn't looking forward to the other ones but the stories that I want to cover tonight one of the things that just absolutely staggers me about them especially the story of Cain and Abel which I hope to get to is like it's so short it's unbelievable it's like ten eleven lines there's nothing to it at all and I've found that it's essentially inexhaustible in its capacity to reveal meaning and I don't exactly know what to make of that I mean I do I think you know because I said I was going to take as rational an approach to this issue as I possibly could I think it has something to do with this intense process of condensation across very long periods of time that's the simplest explanation but I'll tell you the information in there is so densely packed that it really is it's really it's not that easy to come up with an explanation for that not one that's that I find fully compelling I mean I do think that the really old stories and we've been covering the really archaic stories in the Bible so far I think that one of the things that you can be virtually certain about is that everything about them that was memorable was remembered right and so in some sense and this is kind of like the idea of Richard Dawkins ideas of memes which is often why I thought that Richard Dawkins feels a little bit more mystically inclined he would have become Karl you because there are theories are unbelievably similar the similar of meme and the similar of Arc the idea of archetypes of the collective unconscious are very very similar ideas except Union ideas far more profound in my estimation well it just is he thought it through so much better you know because Dawkins tended to think of Mimas sort of like a mind worm you know something that would infest a mind and maybe multiple minds but he never really took I don't think he really ever took the idea with the seriousness it deserved and I did hear him actually make a joke with Sam Harris the last time they talked about the fact that that there was some possibility that the production of memes say religious memes could alter evolutionary history and they both avoided that topic instantly they had a big laugh about it men decided they weren't going to go down that road and so that wasn't fair that was quite interesting to me but these is the the the density of these stories I do really think still is a is a mystery it certainly has something to do with their absolute their in their impossibility to be forgotten you know and that's actually something that we could be tested empirically I don't know if anybody has ever done that because you could tell naive people two stories even equal length right one that had an archetypal theme and the other that didn't and then wait three months and see which one's people remembered better and be relatively straightforward thing to test I haven't tested it but maybe I will at some point but anyways that's all to say that I'm very excited about this lecture because I get an opportunity to go over the story of Adam and Eve and the story of Cain and Abel and I hopefully manage both of those today and maybe we'll get to the story of Noah and the Tower of Babel as well but I wouldn't count on it not Arthur eight we've been not at the rate we've been progressing if that's okay that's that's no problem it's there's no sense rushing this alright so we're going to go before we go that before we do that I want to finish my discussion of the idea of the psychological significance of the idea of God and I've been thinking about this a lot more you know because of course this lecture series gives me the opportunity and the necessity to continue to think and you know it certainly is the case so the hypothesis that I've been developing with the Trinitarian idea is something like that the Trinitarian idea is the earliest emergence in image of the idea that there has to be an underlying cognitive structure that gives rise to consciousness as well as consciousness itself and so what I would suggest was that the idea of God the Father is something akin to the idea of the a priori structure that that gives rise to consciousness you know that's an inbuilt part of us so that's our structure you could think about that as something that's been produced over a vast evolutionary time span and I don't think that's completely out of keeping with the with the with the ideas that are laid forth in Genesis one at least if you think about them from a metaphorical perspective and it's hard to read them literally because I don't know what you know there's an emphasis on day and night but the idea of day and night as as 24-hour diurnal you know daytime and nighttime interchanges that are based on the claw on the earthly clock seems to be a bit absurd when you first start to think about the construction of the cosmos so just doesn't seem to me that a literal interpretation is appropriate and I mean it's another thing that you might not know but you know many of the early church fathers one of them Origen in particular stated very clearly this was in 300 AD that these ancient stories were to be taken as as wise metaphors and not to be taken literally like the idea that the people who established Christianity for example were all the sorts of people who were biblical literalist it's just absolutely historically wrong I mean some of them were and some of them still are that's not the point many of them weren't and it's not like people who live 2,000 years ago were stupid by any stretch of the imagination and so they were perfectly capable of understanding what constant you know what constituted something approximating a metaphor and also knew that fiction in some sense considered as an abstraction could tell you truth that nonfiction wasn't able wasn't able to get at lets you think that fiction is only for entertainment and I think that's a very that's a that's a big mistake to think that so alright so here we go so yes so with regards to the idea of God the Father so the idea is that in order to make sense out of the world you have to have an a priori cognitive structure that was something that Immanuel Kant as I said last time put forward as an argument against the idea that all of the information that we acquire during our lifetime is a consequence of incoming sense data and the reason that Kant objected to that and he was absolutely right about this is that you can't make sense of sense data without an a priori structure you can't extract from sense data the structure that enables you to make sense of sense data it's not possible and that's really being demonstrated I would say beyond the shadow of a doubt since the 1960s and the best demonstration of that was actually the initial failure of artificial intelligence because when the AI people started promising that we would have fully functional and autonomous robots and artificial intelligence back in the 1960s what they didn't understand and what stole them terribly until about the early 1990s was that it was almost that the problem of perception with a much deeper problem than anybody ever recognized because like when you look at the world you just see well look there's objects out there and by the way you don't objects you see tools just so you know in the neurobiology that's quite clear you don't see objects and infer utility you see useful things and infer object so it's actually the reverse of what people generally think but the point is is that regardless of whether you see objects or useful things when you look at the world you just see it and you think well seeing is easy because they're the things are and all you have to do is like you know turn your head and they appear and that's just so wrong that it's it's almost impossible to overstate like the problem of perception is staggeringly difficult and one of the primary reasons that we still don't really have autonomous robots so there were a lot closer to it than we were in the 1960s because it turned out that you actually have to have an embodied you have to have a body before you can say it and even more importantly you have to have a body before you can see because the act of seeing is actually the act of mapping the patterns of the world onto the patterns of the body it's not things are out there you see them then you think about them then you evaluate them then you decide to act on them and then you act I mean that you could call that a folk idea of psychological processing or a perception it's not that is not how it works like your eyes for example map one of the things they do is map right onto your spinal cord for example they might right onto your emotional system so it's actually possible for example for people to be blind and still be able to detect facial expressions which is to say you can with someone who's cortically blind so they've had their visual cortex destroyed often by a stroke they'll tell you that they can't see anything but they can guess which hand you put up if you ask them to and if you flash them pictures of angry or fearful faces they show skin conductance responses to the more emotion laden faces and it's because imagine that the world is made out of patterns which it is then imagine that those patterns are transmitted to you electromagnetically you have to light and then imagine that the pattern is duplicated on the retina and then that pattern is propagated along the optic nerve and then the pattern is distributed throughout your brain and some of that pattern makes up what you call conscious vision but other parts of it just activate your body so for example when I look at this when I look at this this whatever it whatever it is a bottle that's words huh you know when I look at it especially with intent in mind as soon as I look at it the pattern of the BOD of the bottle activates the gripping mechanism of my hand and part of the action of per sortie the active perception is to adjust my bodily posture including my hand grip to be of the optimal size to pick that up and it's not that I see the bottle and then think about how to move my hand that's too slow it's that I use my motor motor cortex to perceive the bottle and that's actually somewhat independent of actually seeing the bottle as a conscious experience so anyways huh the reason the reason that I'm telling you that all of that and there's much more about that that can be told rodney brooks 'is someone to know about he's a robotics engineer who worked in the 1990s and he invented the Roomba among many other things so he's a real genius stuffed guy and he works was one of the first people to really point out that to have to be able to have a machine that perceived well enough to work in the world that you had to give it a body and that the perception would actually be built from the body up rather than from the abstract cognitive perceptions down and so well and that that turned out to be the case and bird rooks boiled all sorts of weird little machines in the 1990s that didn't even really have any central brain but they could do things like run away from light and so they could perceive light that their perception was that act of running away from right and so perception perception is very very very tightly tied to action in ways that people don't normally perceive anyways that's all to say that you cannot perceive the world without being embody and you know your embodied in a manner that's taken you roughly three and a half billion years to pull off right there's being a lot of death as a prerequisite to the embodied form that you take and so it's taken all that trial and error to produce something like you that can interact with the complexity of the world well enough to last the relatively paltry 80 or so years that you can last and so I think about that as this may be wrong but I think it's a useful at least it's a useful hypothesis I think the idea God the Father is something like the birth of the idea that there has to be an internal structure that out of which consciousness itself arises that gives form to things and well and if that's the case and perhaps it's not but if it's the case it's certainly reflection it's a reflection of the kind of factual truth that I've been describing now and then like I also mentioned that I kind of see the idea of both the Holy Spirit and those also of Christ and most specifically of Christ in in the form of the word as the active consciousness that that structure produces and uses not only to to formulate the world because we formulate the world at least the world that we experience we formulate but also to change and modify that world because there's absolutely no doubt that we do that partly with our bodies which are optimally developed to do that which is why we have hands unlike dolphins would have you know very large brains like us but can't really change the world we're really adapted and evolved to change the world and to world and our speech is really a an extension of our ability to use our hands so the speech systems that we use are you know very well-developed motor very well-developed motor skill and generally speaking your your dominant linguistic hemisphere is the same as your dominant hand and people talk with their hands like me as you may have noticed and we use sign language and there's a tight relationship between the use of the hand and the use of language and that's partly because language is a productive force and the hand is part of it part of what changes the world and so all those things are tied together in a very very complex way with this a priori structure and also with the embodied structure and I also think that's part of the reason why classical Christianity puts such an emphasis not only on the divinity of the Spirit but also on the divinity of the body this is a harder thing to grapple with you know it's easier for people to think if you think in religious terms at all that you have some sort of transcended spirit that somehow detached from the body that might have some life after death something like that but the Christian Christianity in particular really insists on the divinity of the body so the idea is that there's an underlying structure it's this quasi patriarchal nature partly because it's for complex reasons but partly because it's a reflection of the social structure as well as other things and then that uses consciousness in the form particularly of language but most particularly in the form of truthful language in order to produce the world in a manner that's good and I think that's a walloping powerful powerful idea especially the relationship between the idea that it's truthful speech that gives rise to the good because that's a really fundamental moral claim and I think that's a tough one to beat man because one of the things I've really noticed is and then this and it isn't just me that's for sure is that you know there's a lot of tragedy in life there's no doubt about that and lots of people that I see for example in my clinical practice are laid low by the tragedy of life but I also see very very frequently that people get tangled up in deceit in webs of deceit that are often multiple generations long and that just takes them out you know and so that so deceit can produce extraordinary levels of suffering that lasts for very very long periods of time and that's really a clinical truism you know because Freud of course identified one of the problems that contributed to the suffering we might associate with mental illness with repression which is it's kind of like a lie of omission that's a perfectly reasonable way to think about it and you stated straight out that there was no difference between the psychotherapeutic the curative psychotherapeutic effort and supreme moral effort including truth that those were the same thing as far as he was concerned and Carl Rogers another great clinician who was at one point a Christian missionary before he became more Moore's more strictly scientific he believed that it was in truthful dialogue that that that clinical transformation took place and you know it and of course one of the prerequisites for genuine transformation in the clinical setting is that the therapist tells the truth and the client tells the truth because otherwise how in the world do you know what's going on how can you solve the problem when you don't even know what the problem is and you don't know what the problem is unless the person tells you the truth that's something really to think about in light of your own relationships because you know if you don't tell the people around you the truth and they don't know who you are and maybe that's a good thing you know because well seriously people have reasons to lie right I mean that aren't trivial but it's really worth knowing that you can't even get your hands on the problem unless you formulate it truthfully and if you can't get your hands on the problem the probability that you're going to solve it is it's just so low and so then I've been thinking about as well the this and this idea has become more credible to me the longer I've developed it the longer I thought about it you know the idea that there's oh go Bob it's partly the idea that well let me let me figure out how to start this property friend of mine business partner and a guy that I've written scientific papers with very smart guy took me to task and I think I told you this a little bit about using the term dominance hierarchy which might be fine for like chimpanzees and for lobsters and for creatures like that but not not first not not for chimpanzees even so much and and he said something very interesting he thought that the idea of dominance hierarchy was actually a projection of a early 20th century quasi Marxist hypothesis onto the animal kingdom that was being observed and the notion that the hierarchical structure that you see that characterizes say mating hierarchies in chimps for example the idea that that was predicated on power was actually a projection of a kind of political ideology and I thought that really bugged me for a long time when he said that because like because I'd really been used to using the term dominant IURC and I thought he told me all that I thought that's so annoying it's so annoying because it might be right and then it took me months to think about it and then I and then I was also reading funds to all at the same time and he's a primatologist and also Jaak panksepp because he was a brilliant brilliant effective neuroscientist who unfortunately just died he wrote a great book called aspect of neuroscience and for rats to play they have to play fair or they won't play with each other and that's that's a staggering discovery right because anything that helps instantiate the emergence of ethical behavior in animals and that associates it with an evolutionary process which is essentially what what pays up was doing gives credence to the notion that the ethics that guide us are not near social logical epiphenomena constructs their deep deeply rooted if flat and that they're rats for God's sake he can't trust them and they still play fair you know and the will notice that the chimp troops that he studied but it wasn't wasn't the barber barbaric chimp that ruled with an iron fist that was the successful ruler because he kept getting torn to shreds by his by the compatriots that he ignored and stomped on Susie showed some weakness they just tear him into pieces the chimp leaders that were stable you know that had a stable Kingdom let's say we're very reciprocal in terms of their interactions with their friends and chimps have friends and they out they actually last for very long time chimp friendships and they were also very reciprocal in their interactions with the females and with the infants and I thought that's what friends the wall is a very smart guy and I thought that was also foundational science because it's really something to note that the attributes that give rise to dominance in a male dominance hierarchy sort of use that word let's call it authority that might be better or even shudder competence which I think is a better way of thinking about it is that that's not predicated purely on anything that's that's that's as simple as brute power and I think too you know I think as well that the idea and this is a deeply devious and dangerous political idea in my estimation the idea that male dominance hierarchies sorry male hierarchies are fundamentally predicated on power in a little in a law-abiding in a law-abiding society I think is I think all you fu think about that for like a month say she's not long to understand how absurd that is because most people who are in positions of authority let's say are just as hemmed in by ethical responsibilities or even more so than people at the other levels of the of the hierarchy and we know this even in the managerial literature because we know generally speaking that managers are more stressed by their subordinates than the subordinates are stressed by their managers and that's not surprising you want to be responsible for like 200 people you really want that that's hard work man and I mean I know it's a pain to have a boss because the to care about what the boss thinks and maybe the person is arbitrary which case they're not going to be particularly successful but it's no joke to be responsible for 200 people and you have to behave very carefully when you're in a position of responsibility and authority like that because you will get called out if you make mistakes constantly so it's not like you're it's not like because you have a position that's higher up in the hierarchy that you're less constrained by ethical necessity now if you're a psychopath well that's a whole different story but Psychopaths have to move pretty rapidly from hierarchy to hierarchy right because they get found out quite quickly and as soon as their reputation is shattered then they can't get away with their shenanigans anymore so okay so all of this is to say that there is something very interesting about the pattern of behavior so imagine that imagine that sexual selection is working something like this and we know that sexual selection is a very very very very powerful biological force even though biologists ignored it for almost a hundred years after Charles Darwin originally wrote about it thinking mostly about natural selection they didn't like the idea of sexual selection because it tended to introduce the notion of mind into the process of evolution because it deals with choice you know but so imagine on the one hand that you have a male hierarchy we know that the men at the top of the hierarchy are much more likely to be reprimanded the boil it's particularly true of men so you have twice as many female ancestors as you have male ancestors not going to do the math but and I know it doesn't sound plausible but you could look it up and figure it out it's it's perfectly reasonable fact that actually happens to be true so there's twice as if twice as many female ancestors because females are twice as likely on average to leave offspring as men now what happens is any man man who does reproduce tends to reproduce more than once but a bunch of the reproduce zero whereas so it would be the average man who reproduces has two children and the average man who doesn't reproduce have zero obviously and the average woman who reproduces has one child so that means that there's twice as many females in your line as there is males so that that's a big deal and and so imagine that it works something like this so the men elect the competent men who are admired and who are and who are I can't say dominant who are who are given positions of authority and respect let's put it that way and it's like an election now it could be an actual democratic election but it's at least an election of consensus or it's at least an election of well we're not going to kill him for now which is also a form of election right it's a form of Tolerance you know so so and then what happens is the women for their part peel from the top of the mental hierarchy and so you've got two factors that are driving human sexual selection across vast stretches of evolutionary time one is the election of men by men to positions where they're much more likely to reproduce and the second is the tendency of women to peel off the top of dáil dominant turkeys which is extraordinarily well established cross culturally even if you flatten out the socio-economic disparity say between men and women like they've done in Scandinavia you don't you don't reduce the tendency of women to peel off the top of the male hierarchy by much and why would you I mean women are smart why in the world wouldn't they go for four why wouldn't they strive to make relationships with men who are relatively successful and why wouldn't they let the men themselves define why that how that constitutes success it makes sense like if you want to figure out who the best man is why not let the men compete and the man who wins whatever the competition is is the best man by definition how else would you define it so okay so why am I telling you all that well the reason is is because it seems to me that there's this comp this being this complex interplay across human evolution between the election of the male dominance hierarchy and sexual success and that's a big deal if it's true it could be because what would happen you see is that as men evolved they would evolve to be better and better at climbing up the male hierarchy because the ones who weren't good at that wouldn't reproduce so obviously that's going to happen but then it wouldn't just be a hierarchy because there's a whole bunch of different hierarchies and so then you might say well are there commonalities across hierarchies reasonable thing to propose it mean they're not completely opposed to one another at least if you're more success relatively more successful in run hierarchy then you're more probable it's more probable that you'll be successful in another and that's actually a really good definition of general intelligence or IQ and that's actually one of the things that women select men for now men also select women for that but the selection pressure is even higher from women to men and general IQ is one of the things that propels you up across dominant turkeys because it's a general problem-solving mechanism and the other thing that seems to do that to some degree is conscientiousness and there's also some evidence that women prefer conscientious men so and of course why wouldn't they because you can trust them and and and and and they work and so those are both good things so then you think okay so men have adapted to start to climb the male dominance hierarchy but it's the set of all possible hierarchies that they're adapted to climb and so then you think there's there's a set of attributes that can be acted out that and that can be embodied that will increase the probability that you're going to rise to the top of any given hierarchy and then you could say well that as you adapt to that fact then you start to develop an understanding of what that pattern constitutes and so that starts to become the abstract representation of something like multi-dimensional competence and that's like the abstraction of virtue itself well and none of that has them none of that's arbitrary now and that's as bloody well grounded in biology if anything could be and I think that's a really hard argument to refute and like one of the things I should tell you about how I think is that when I think something I spend a long time trying to figure out if it's wrong you know because I like to hack at it from every possible direction to see if it's a weak idea because if it's a weak idea then I'd rather just dispense with it and find something better and I've had a real hard time trying to figure out what's wrong with that idea I it seems to me that it's pretty damn solid and then the idea that you know if you watch what people do in movies and so on and when they're reading fiction it's obvious that they're very good at identifying both the hero and the antihero we could say the antihero generally speaking the bad guy is someone who strives for authority and position but fails generally speaking not always but fail so he's a good bad example a kid you take a kid to a good guy bad guy movie the kid takes out pretty fast that he's not supposed to be the bad guy and and figures out very quickly to zero in on the good guy and that means that there's there's an affinity between the pattern of good guy that's being played out in the fiction and the perceptual capacity of the child you know and one of the things I told my son when he was a kid I used to take him to movies that were sometimes more frightening than they should have been but one of the things I always told him was I never said don't be afraid because I think that's bad advice for kids what I said was keep your eye on the hero right keep your eye on the hero and again he was gripped by the movie and often quite afraid of them you know because movies can be very frightening so he just like zero in on that guy and hoping and you know what it's like in a movie you hope that the good guy wins generally speaking and I mean why do you do that where does that where does that come from you see how deeply rooted that is inside you you'll bloody well go line up and pay to watch that happen it's not an easy thing to understand and it's it's so self-evident to people that we don't even notice that it's a tremendous mystery and so is it so unreasonable to think that we would have actually over the millennia come to some sort of collective conclusion about what the best of the best guys are best of the good guys are and what the worst of the bad guys are and to me architect Lee speaking thinking of that as the hostile brothers so that's Christ and Satan or Cain and Abel for example very common mythological motif the hostile brothers it's like those are those those are archetypes it's like the Satan for example is by definition the worst that a person can be and Christ by definition this is independent of anything but conceptualization is by definition the best today that a man can be now as I said speaking psychologically and conceptually but I given our capacity for imagination and our ability to engage in fiction and our love for fiction and our capacity to dramatize and our love for the story stories of heroism and catastrophe and and good and evil I can't see how it could any other way like so well so so that's part of the idea that's driving the notion of the evolution of the idea of God and even more specifically driving the evolution of the idea at least in part of the Trinity so God is an abstracted ideal formulated in large part to dissociate the ideal from any particular incarnation or man or any ruler and there's another rule in the biblical stories which is that when the actual ruler I've mentioned this before when the actual ruler becomes confused with the abstracted ideals then the state immediately turns into a tyranny and the whole bloody thing collapses so the idea it's so sophisticated you know one of the things that we figured out and this was a hard thing to figure out was that you had to take the abstraction and divorce it from any particular power structure and then think about it as something that existed as an abstraction but a real thing right real and that it governed your behavior in everyone's behavior including the damned king the king was responsible to the abstracted ideal man that's an impossible that is such an impossible ideal you know why would if they agreed that 5000 years ago but one of the things you see continually happening in the Old Testament is that as soon as the Israelite for example the Israelite Kings become almighty the real God comes along and just cuts them into pieces and then the whole bloody state falls apart for like hundreds of years it's like I think that's a lesson that that we have not thoroughly consciously yet learned it's still implicit in the narratives we still haven't figured out why that's the case again I think that's a real hard argument to to to dispense with so all right so we looked at this a little bit the Trinitarian idea is that there's a there's a father that's maybe the dramatic representation of the structures that underlie consciousness the embody structures that underlie consciousness and then there's the son and that's that that's consciousness but in its particular historical form that's the thing that's so interesting about the figure of the son and then there's consciousness as such and that seems to be something like the the indwelling spirit and so I mean these psychological ideas came from somewhere right that they have a history they didn't just spring out of nowhere and they emerge from from dreams and hypothesis and artistic visions and all of that over a long time and maybe they get clarified into something like consciousness but it takes a long time to get from to get from watching you know from to chimpanzees watching each other to a human being saying well we're we all we all exhibit this faculty called consciousness I mean that's a long journey you know that's a really long journey and there's going to be plenty of stages in between one of the things I really like about Jean Piaget the developmental psychologist was that he was so insistent that children act out and dramatized ideas before they understand them and and Merlin Donald who's a psychologist at Queen's University wrote a couple of interesting books along those lines at all as well looking at the importance of imitation for the development of higher cognition in human beings and so the notion that we embody ideas before we abstract them out and then represent them in an articulated way I think is an extraordinarily solid idea and I really can't see how it could be any other way and if you watch children you see that like think about what a child is doing when he plays house or she plays house you know the child acts out the father or the mother but what's so interesting about me to think well look isn't that cute she's imitating her mother it's like no she's not that's not what happens because when your child imitates you it's very annoying because you move your arm and then they move their arm and you know that you move your head to copy you no one likes that it's direct direct imitation that's not what a child is doing with the child is playing what the child is doing is watching the mother over multiple instantiations and then extracting out the spirit called mother and that's whatever if mother like across all those multiple manifestations and then laying out that pattern internally and manifesting itself in an abstract world it's so sophisticated it's just I'm that's what you're doing when you're playing house or having a tea partier or taking care of a doll it's not you've seen your mother take care of a doll you haven't seen that it's that you're smart enough to pull out the abstraction and then embody it and certainly the child is attempting to strive towards an ideal at that point you know she's not lighting her doll on fire you know well with you know certain exceptions but generally ones that we try to not encourage right so so you see that capacity in the children and it's something we also know that if children don't don't engage in that sort of dramatic and pretend play to a tremendous degree that they don't they don't get properly socialized it's really a critical element of developing self understanding and then also developing the capability of being with others because what you do when you're a child especially around the age of four is you jointly construct a shared fictional world will play house together let's say and then you act out your joint roles within that shared fictional world you know and and that's a form of very advanced cognitions very sophisticated I see that and Piaget did as well and so did you and so did Freud these brilliant observers and also Merlin Donald these brilliant observers of the manner in which cognition came to be they noted very clearly that embodied imitation and dramatic abstraction constituted the ground out of which higher abstract cognition emerged enough how could it not be because obviously we were mostly bodies before we were minds clearly and so we were acting out things way before we understood them just like the chimpanzees act out the idea that you know you have to act reasonably sensibly if your head chimpanzee or you're going to get yourself ripped apart and you see that rules because when wolves have a dominance dispute you know they pump up their hair at each other to look big and they they growl and bark and you know they're very menacing and one wolf chickens out rolls over puts up his neck and basically what he's saying is yeah I'm pretty useless so you could kill me if I want to if you want to and the other wolf says yeah you know you're pretty useless and I could tear out your throat but tomorrow we might need to bring down a wolf or moves so I'll kick you out and and it's not like they think that because they don't know they don't think that they acted out as a behavioral pattern then if you're an anthropologist or a an ethologist and you went and watched the wolves you'd say it's as if they were acting according to the following rule and that often confused me because I thought well the wolves act black wolves act out rules and I thought no no a rule is what we construct when we articulate a behavioral pattern right we observe a stable behavioral pattern and when we articulate it we can call it a rule but for the Wolves it's not a rule it's just a stable behavioral pattern and so we acted like wolf troops or chimpanzee troops all of that when well i'm firfer untold really untold tens and perhaps hundreds of millions of years before we were able to formulate that pattern of behavior at anything approximating a story or the image and and even longer before we could articulate it as a set of ethical rules and I'm dwelling this I know I've repeated some of this before but it's so important because you know there's this tremendous push especially from the social the social constructionist to make the case that ethics is arbitrary ethics is morality is relative there's no fundamental biological grounding in relationship to human behavior especially in the in the category of ethics and I think that that's well first of all it's dangerous because that means that people are anything you want to turn them into and you bloody well better be careful of people who think that and second I just think that the evidence that that's wrong is so overwhelming that we should just stop thinking that way I mean the and that's probably why I'm also attacking this from an evolutionary perspective there's lots of converging lines of evidence that ethic ethical standards of at least of the most of the most crucial store sort not only evolve but also spontaneously re-emerge for example in the dramatic play of children so we need to take that seriously and so well that's partly what we're doing here trying to take that seriously so okay so the idea there at least in part was that the father employed the Sun to generate habitable order out of chaos I also think there might be something more approximately true about that as well too because one of the things we do know there's something that's cool about men men are much more criminal than women and that by the way that does not look like it's socio-cultural partly because it Peaks when testosterone kicks in around 14 like it just spikes the hell up and then it really it stays pretty high until about 27 and so standard penological theory for those of you who don't know this is that if you have a repeat offender you know a guy who just won't stop getting in trouble yes home in prison till he's 28 and it isn't like you're rehabilitating him or anything it's like by 28 he's done with his criminal career because the crime curve is peaks at 15 and then falls down around 27 or so it burns out and that's often by the way that's often that's that's often when men get married and settle down and stabilized one of the things that's one of the things that's cool about that is the creativity curve for men is almost exactly the same thing it ramps up when testosterone kicks in and then it starts to flatten out around 27 that curves match very very closely so that's so that's that's quite cool it's the creativity element of it that I'm particularly interested in because the creativity is in many ways it attributed youth and that's look I mean if you look at that sentence and you've stripped it of its religious context what you would say is that well the older people use the younger people to generate creative ideas and renew the world it's like yeah that's that's what happens and you you know you also have no idea how many of the things that we discovered or invented as human beings were stumbled across by children and adolescence you know because they're well they're much more exploratory they're less constrained by their by their already extent knowledge structures and they're less conservative so yeah that seems just right to me so and right in an extraordinarily important way because it also means that it's like if you're an actual father one of the things that it means is that that's part of what you should be encouraging your son to do right which is which is does the rail of a father is to encourage that is clearly the role and to encourage is to say well go out there confront the chaos of the unknown and the chaos that underlies everything and drop it with it you know how because you can do it here as big as the chaos itself and you know do something useful as a consequence and makes your life better and make everyone else's life better and you know you can do it and man that's the right thing to tell that's the right thing to tell young men you know talking to young women is more complicated because they have more more let's say issues to deal with because their lives are more complicated in some ways but that's definitely the right thing to be to be telling your your son and one of the things that I've really noticed recently since I've been lecturing especially in the last seven or eight months most of my audiences being young men and and I've talked a lot of them too a lot I've talked a lot to them about both truth and responsibility and I think that those those are the two things that underlie this capacity and it there seems to me to be a tremendous hunger for that idea it's not the same idea as right you know it's very different ideas it's a counterpart to right and so it's you know life is hard it's chaotic it's difficult it's really definitely a challenge and so you can either shrink from that and no bloody wonder because you know it's going to kill you it's not it's no joke man where you can fuckin front it and try to do something about it well what's better and and then you say to the person look man you could do it like that's what a human being is like and if you just stood up and got yourself together and you find out by trying that you can in fact do that and I do think that that's that's a great core religious message as far as I can tell and I think that's deeply embedded in this sort of in this sort of idea so all right so this is what I've been telling you this is something like how knowledge itself is generated first of all there's the unknown as and that's really what you don't know anything about and generally when you encounter that you don't encounter it with thought you encounter it like this right and that that's the first representation of the absolutely unknown it's something that is beyond your comprehension and it's terrifying and because it's beyond your comprehension you cannot perceive it you cannot understand it but you still have to deal with it and the way you deal with it is that you freeze that's what the that's what a basilisk does say to the to the kids in Harry Potter right they take a look at it and they freeze that's the snake the terrible snake of chaos that lives underneath everything you see that that thing freezes you and that's because you're a prey animal but at the same time it makes you curious and so that's the first level of contact with the absolute unknown is the emotional combination of freezing and curiosity and that's reflected I think in the Dragon stories the dragon is the terrible thing that lives underground Accords gold or hoards virgins very very strange behavior for reptile as we pointed out before but the idea is that it's a symbolic representation of the predatory quality of the unknown combined with the capacity of the unknown to generate nothing but novel information and it's very you can see that is very characteristic of human beings because we are prey animals but we're also unbelievably exploratory and we're pretty damn good predators and we occupy this weird cognitive niche and so one of the things we've learned is that if we forth lightly confront the unknown terrifying as it is there's a massive prize to be gained continually and so that seems to be true right it's true as anything is and then I would also say that that idea and we know that one of the metaphors that underlies gods extraction of habitable order out of chaos at the beginning of time is an older idea and a more archaic idea that God confronted something like the Leviathan and that's one of the words for this serpent like chaos creature that's often used in the Old Testament or the Leviathan and they beat them on yeah that's the other thing and so there's this idea that I think came probably came from the Mesopotamia that the God either in the sun-like aspect or in the father like aspect is the thing that confronts this terrible beast that represents the chaotic unknown and cuts it into pieces and then sometimes gives the body parts to the populace in order to feed them so you can see a hunting metaphor there as well but it's deeper than that and so all right so the first thing is there's the absolute unknown and the unknown is what you do not understand it's what's beyond the campfire maybe it's what's beyond the tree even more anciently an old word when we when we lived in trees it's out there that where you don't know and what's out there crocodiles and snakes and birds of prey and cats and all sorts of things like predatory cats and they will eat you but there's utility and going out there to find out what's there like maybe you go and you don't kill the snake you kill the damn nest of snakes and that makes you pretty popular just as you should be that accelerates your your rep reductive potential let's say and we're descended from people who did that and so we have this notion about how the world is structured that's deeply embedded in our psyche like really really deeply way way down way below the surface cognition way down in the limbic system in these ancient parts of the brain that are like 60 million years old or a hundred million years old or older than that ancient ancient brain structures and so the first thing we do is we act out our encounter with the unknown world and we act that out in the same way in a manner that's analogous to the manner that's presented as a description of what it is that God does at the beginning of time to extract habitable order out of chaos and I I will tell you about the other part of that for now so you act it out first and then the second thing is you watch people who act it out and you start to make representations of that that's stories right and maybe you admire them and then after a long time you collect a bunch of those stories and then you can say what that is you can articulate it as a pattern and so and this is something Nietzsche also figured out to begin with you know because prior to Nietzsche I would say he did so many things first it was quite remarkable you know there was an idea that you first think and then you act and then people like to think that of course you do it bloody rubbish because you're impulsive as you can possibly imagine you're always doing things before you think and sometimes that's a really good idea so the idea that you see things and then think and then act it's like you really know I'm sorry did I don't do that I know one I know I know does that and they certainly do that don't do that when they're emotional you know you act first and one of the things that Nietzsche said very clearly was that our ideas emerged out of the ground of our action over over thousands and thousands of years and then when philosophers were putting forward those ideas what they were doing wasn't generating creative ideas they were just telling the story of humanity it's already there it's already in us it's already in our patterns of behavior and and it strikes me that that's well he was a genius and that was one of the genius one of his many many observations of pure genius and so you can think about it you know you can think about it like this too is that there's unknown and then you act in the face of the unknown and then you you dream about the action and that's what you're doing in a movie theater and then you speak about it and so you know and of course once you speak about it that affects how you dream and how you dream affects how you act it's not like the all of the causal direction is it was one way because it's not deep these things loop but it's still from the unknown through the body through the imagination into articulation that's the primary mode of the generation of of wisdom let's say and you can easily map that onto an evolutionary explanation because the body comes first right and then is the imagination which is the body in abstraction and only then the word and of course that's exactly how things did evolve because we could imagine things long before we could speak at least that's the theory so and I represented that this is a image from my book maps of meaning and so so the idea is that this is the fundamental representation of the unknown as such it's half spirit because it partakes of the air like a bird and it's half matter because it's on the ground like a like a like a make and and that's what you think is there when you don't know what is there that's how your body reacts to what's there when you don't know what is there you know that too because if you're alone at night you know it maybe you're a little rattled up for one reason other maybe you watched a horror movie and you know there's some weird noise in the other room it's dark and you could just try this once it's like so you're on edge you think you want to turn the light on and go in the room and see don't do that just open the door a little bit and sneak your hand in and just watch what your imagination fills that room with right and then then you remember what it's like to be three years old in bed in afraid of the dark right and I read a good book on dragons lately recently that that that had a very interesting hypothesis about them I thought one of the things the guy did was track I can't remember his name unfortunately track how common the image of the dragon was worldwide it's unbelievably widespread it's crazily widespread and he thought that this was actually the category of primate predator and the predator was so predator is a weird category right because like there's there's crocodiles in it and there's lions and they don't have much in common except they eat you so it's a functional category and so this is the this is the imagistic representation of the functional category of predator and his predator theory was well if you're a monkey then a bird would pick you off like an eagle and so that's this right and then if it wasn't eagle it was a cat as they climb teary trees and give you a good chomping and then if it wasn't a cat and you go down to the ground and a snake would get you or maybe a snake would climb up the tree because snakes like to do that and get you and so that's a pre cat snake basically free cat snake bird and that's the thing you really that's the thing you're really want to avoid you don't want to come across one of those and so and then you know the other thing it does is breathe fire which is quite interested because obviously fire was both greatest friend and greatest enemy of humanity and we've mastered fire for a long time it might be as long as two or three million years that's what Richard rang him I think it's rang ham he wrote a book recently on I think it was Ragan who wrote a book on when human beings learned to cook that was about two million years ago and cooking increased the increase the availability of calories you know how chimpanzees are sort of shaped like a big like they're ugly they're shaped like a big bowling ball you know they're really they look really fat and it's and they're short and they're wide and that's because they have intestinal tracts that are like you know 300 miles long and the reason for that is because they have to digest leaves and so you go out in the forest and like sit there and eat leaves for a whole day and see how that works out for you you know yeah they have no calories in them so chimps spend about inkless I think it's eight hours a day chewing and it's because what they eat has no nutritional value and then they have to have this tremendous guts in order to extract anything at all out of it human beings at some point just thought Oh to hell with that we'll cook something and then we traded our guts for brain which you know more or less has worked and I think it's made us a lot more attractive as well so okay well so the idea here was that well that's the basic archetype of the unknown as such and then I like the st. George version of this it's so cool because st. George lives in a like a castle and the castle is partly falling down and it's partly because there's a dragon that's come up to like it's an eternal dragon it's come back to giver who in a rough time which always happens because there isn't the eternal dragon is always given are giving our fallen down castles a rough time always and so then st. George's the hero who goes out to confront the dragon and he frees the Virgin from its grasp and I would say that's a pretty straightforward story about the sexual attractiveness of the masculine spirit that's willing to forthrightly encounter the unknown that's it looks just straight looks like a straight biological representation to me and it's a really really old story right it's the oldest written story we have and that's basically the Mesopotamian creation myth the Anu male ish which which basically lays out precisely that story and so and it's replayed I mean I bet you the movie goers among you especially the ones that are more attracted to the superhero you know they're really flashy sort of superhero type movies you've probably seen the st. George story like 150 times in the last 10 years you never get tired of it because it's the central story of mankind so you've got the unknown as such and that is what you react to with your body in the existential terror and extraordinary curiosity are gripping you and then it's like the unknown unknowns that who's the politician under Bush Rumsfeld yeah I think the reason that that phrase caught on so well is because he nailed an archetype there's unknown unknowns and there's known unknowns and that's the unknown unknown and you have to be able to react to an unknown unknown because they can get you and you can't just plead ignorance because then you're dead that doesn't work like human beings are the sort of creature who has to know what to do when they don't know what to do and that's very paradoxical and what we do is we prepare to do everything that's right we're on guard we prepare to do everything very very stressful and but also very engaging and very very much something that heightens consciousness and maybe those circuits are permanently turned on in human beings because we also know that we're going to die and no other animal knows that and so sometimes I think that our that our stress circuits are just on all the time and that's part of what accounts for our heightened consciousness so you have your unknown unknowns and then you have your relatively you have the unknowns that you actually encounter in the world like the mystery of your of your romantic partner when you have a fight with them it's like well we're having a fight who the hell are you I mean you're not the absolute unknown because I know something about you but you're the unknown as its manifesting itself to me right now right and and and then there's a known that we inhabit and then there's the knower and the known is given symbolic representation as far as I've been able to tell in patriarchal form in the form of male deities and the unknown as you encountered it's given feminine form so we won't get into that too much but but if you're interested in that you could look at my maps of meetings lectures or maybe take a look at the book but I think it's a good I think it's a good schema for religious archetypes I've worked on a long time it seems to fit the union criteria quite nicely it maps nicely onto Joseph Campbell's ideas he got almost all has ideas from you however and it also makes sense from a biological and an evolution a perspective as far as I can tell that's a lot of cross validation at least in my estimation so okay so back to the hierarchy of dominance well let's take a look at it a little bit so I'm quite enamored of lobsters as some of you might know because I found out this just blew me away when I found it out I mean I I've done a lot of work in neuro chemistry some similar chemistry because I used to study alcoholism and drug abuse and alcoholism to study alcohol you have to know a lot about the brain because alcohol goes everywhere in the brain it affects every neural chemical system and so if you're going to study alcohol it kind of has to study neuro chemistry in general and so I did that for quite a long time I really got in a Murud of a book called the neuro psychology of anxiety by Jeffery gray which is an absolute work of genius although extraordinarily did I don't know how many references that book has it's like must be a thousand and gray actually read them and worse he understood them and then and then he and then he integrated them into this book and so to read it you have to really master functional neural chemistry and animal behaviorism and and motivation and emotion and neural Anatomy like it's a killer book but man it's really rich and it's taken psychologists about 40 years to really unpack that book but one of the things I learned about that was just exactly how much continuity there was in the neural chemistry of human beings in the neural chemistry of animals it's absolutely staggering it's the sort of thing that makes the fact of evolution something like self evident I do think it's self-evident for other reasons that I'll tell you about later I think evolution or I think natural selection random mutation and natural selection is the only way you can solve the problem of how to deal with an environment that's complex beyond your ability to comprehend I think what you do is you generate endless variants because god only knows what the hell's going to happen next they all almost all of them die because they're failures and a couple propagate and you know the environment keeps moving around like a giant snake you never know what it's going to do next and so the best you can do is say well here's thirty things that might work and you know twenty-eight of them are going to perish if you're if you're an insect it's like the ratio is way way higher than that so anyways back to the lobsters in all of these so these creatures engage in in dominance disputes and and I think dominance is the right way to think about it because lobsters aren't very empathic and they're not very social and so it really is the toughest lobster that wins you know and what's so cool about the lobster is that when a lobster wins he flexes and gets bigger so he looks bigger because he's a winner it's like he's advertising that and the biological the neurochemical system that makes him flex is serotonergic and you think well who cares what the hell does that mean well tell you what it means it's the same chemical that's affected by antidepressants in human beings and so like if you're depressed you're a defeated lobster like you're like this I'm small I'm not you know things are dangerous I don't want to fight you give someone an antidepressant it's like up they stretch and then they're ready to like take on the world again well if you give lobsters who just got defeated in the fight serotonin then they stretch out and they'll fight again and that's like we separated from those creatures on the evolutionary timescale somewhere between 350 and 600 million years ago and the damn neuro chemistry is the same and so that's another indication of just how important hierarchies of authority are I mean they've been conserved since the time of lobsters right there weren't trees around when lobsters first first manifested themselves on the planet and so what that means is these hierarchies that I've been talking about those things are older than trees and so one of the truisms for what constitutes real from a Darwinian perspective is that which has been around the longest period of time right because it's had the longest period of time to exert selection pressure well we know we evolved and lived in trees something on the order of 60 million years ago we're talking ten times as far back as that for the hierarchy and so the idea that human beings that the hierarchy is something that has exerted selection pressure on human beings is I don't think that's a disputable that's not a disputable issue how it's done it and exactly what that means we can argue about but like that sort of biological continuity is just absolutely unbelievable I it was funny because I revealed this finding I didn't discover this I read about it but I talked to my graduate students about I used to take them out for breakfast you know and they were very contentious snappy Bunch and and they're always trying to one-up each other and they're quite witty and for like six months until it got very annoying every time one of them went up the other they'd stretch themselves out like snap their hands like so that was that was very funny it was really very funny so you see this in lobsters and so that's pretty amazing so you know and one of the other thing that's really cool about lobsters is that let's say you've been like talk lobster for a long time but you're getting kind of old and some young lobster just you know whales the hell out of you and and so you're all depressed but thing is your brain is dominant but you don't have much of a brain because you're a lobster and so now what are you going to do because you just lost and the answer is while your brain will dissolve and then you'll grow a subordinate brain yeah so that's we're thinking about two right here for a couple of reasons first of all if any of you have ever been seriously defeated in life you know what that's like it's like it's a death a descent a dissolution and if you're lucky a regrowth and and maybe not as the same person that's what happens to people with post-traumatic stress disorder right their brains undergo permanent neurological transformation and they then inhabit a world it's much more dangerous than the world that they inhabited to begin with but we also know - if you have post-traumatic stress disorder or depression that your hippocampus shrinks right it dies and shrinks and you can sometimes get it to grow back your hippocampus shrinks and your amygdala grows and the amygdala increases emotional sensitivity and the hippocampus inhibits emotional sensitivity and so if you've been badly defeated the hippocampus shrinks and the amygdala grows now if you recover the hippocampus will regrow and the antidepressants actually seem to help that but the damn amygdala never shrinks again and so well so that's another lesson from the lobster it's quite a terrifying one but but it's one like it's so interesting that you can relate to that right it's like I get what that poor crustacean is going through you know so okay here's the rats and this is from yak Bank steps work rat he was the first guy who figured out the rats giggle and you might think well what kind of stupid thing is that to study is like $50,000 research grant for giggling rats you know aside but he discovered the play circuitry in mammals that's a big deal right it's like discovering a whole new continent there's a play circuit enamels it's built right in so it's not socially constructed there's a there's a biological platform for that and so what panksepp would do with rats he found out if rats if you take a rat puff away from its mother it dies even if you feed it even if you keep it warm it dies now you can stop it from dying by taking a pencil with an eraser on the end and massaging it right because rats won't live without love and the same thing happens to human babies and we saw that Romania when there was that catastrophe have to tell chesco in the orphanages where the orphanages were full of unwanted babies because Ceausescu insisted that every Romanian woman was constantly pregnant so the orphan is just stacked up with unwanted babies lots of them didn't even have names and they were warehoused warm shelter food devastating lots of them died most of them died before the first year and the ones that didn't die were permanently dysfunctional because you have to be touched if you're a human being it's not an option you have to be played with it's not an option it's it's part of neural developmental necessity and you have to also play fair so because otherwise you produce a very disjointed child who isn't able to engage in the niceties of social interaction which is continual play in some sense and reciprocity so what panksepp did with his rat he noticed that male rats juveniles really liked to wrestle and they wrestle just like humans beings wrestle they pinned each other for crying out loud with like that that rat has just lost he's down for a ten count right and so so what you do is you take juvenile rats and you can find out that they want to play because you can attach a spring to them and then they'll try to run and you can measure how hard they're running by how hard they're pulling on the spring and then you can estimate how motivated they are and so you can find out that well fed rat who doesn't have anything on his mind will still work hard to play if to enter an arena where he's been allowed to play before he'll work for that so that you think while the rats motivated so the two rats go out there and they play and and so they're playing like dogs play and everyone knows what that looks like if you're you know what you have any sense about dogs they kind of go like this and kids do that and maybe you do that with your wife if you're gonna play with her a little bit okay my poor my poor wife man when she huh she was a she was a young she had older siblings and so she wasn't played with as much when she was little as she might have been and I used to like you know what you take a pill away and you go like this three times right that means look out a pillow is coming your way so I go one two three Wow but she looked she was completely dismayed at me like what do you do that for and I thought well I eventually taught her that rule the other thing I used to do the only thing I used to do you know it said sometimes she'd come at me like this when we were playing round and I grabbed her wrist and I'd knock her for her for her hamsters heard not close together she used to just get completely annoyed about that and I thought right that's what you do you just opened your hands well she didn't know that either so she hadn't been played with enough when she was a little rat and so anyways anyway so you let the route the little rats go out there right and so let's imagine one of them is 10% bigger than other and so that the 10% bigger rat wins because 10% is enough in rat way to ensure that you're going to be the Pinner rather than the penny okay so so that's fine so a knit net the rat the rat pins the big rat pins a little rat and now the big rat is the is the authority rat and so then the next time that the rats play the little rod has to invite the big rat to play so the big rats out there being cool and a little that pops up and you know does the whole will you play with me thing and the big rat will deign to play with it but if you pair them repeatedly unless the big rat lets the little rat win 30 percent of the time so little rat will not invite him to play and panksepp discovered that it's like I read that that just blew me away it's like that is so amazing because you see well first of their there's an analogy to psays ideas about the emergence of morality out of play and human being so that was very cool but the notion that that was built in to rats at the level of wrestling was and their social they're deeply social animals right they have to know how to get along with one another and most of their authority disputes dominance disputes you don't want them to end in bloodshed and combat because you know if your rat won and I'm rat 2 and we tear each other to shreds in a dominance dispute rat 3 is just going to move in it's really not a great strategy and so be better if we could settle our differences you know somewhat peacefully and so while so rat anyway Peg's had figured out that rats play and not only did they play they play fair and they seemed to enjoy it he also figured out this was really cool to that if you give juvenile rats attention deficit disorder drugs ritalin suppresses prey play so that's worth thinking about it's like well why do you have to give juvenile human beings amphetamines in school well because they need to play well you know they don't get to play you know get to wrestle around I mean that's oppression as far as I can tell they don't get to wrestle around that's fine feed them some amphetamines man that'll shut down the old play circuits well is the other problem is panksepp found out that if you don't let juvenile male rats play their prefrontal cortexes don't develop properly surprise surprise you're not letting them ensure it's like what else would you expect so you know that's something to think about really hard I would say so well so there's some wolves going at it and we're all hunting not exactly there's some moves having an authority dispute but more technically speaking and a lot of its posturing you know they tend they tend not well socialized wolves tend not to hurt each other during authority disputes because well for over obvious reasons it's too dangerous and so they have other ways of demonstrating who should be listen to authorities and there's chimps doing you have this particular house I think if I remember correctly I think it's right this is a really cool picture because I think this chimp chimps don't like snakes by the way so for example if you take a chimp that's never seen a snake and you show it a snake it is not happy it will get the hell away from that snake if you bring a chimp anesthetized into a roomful of chimps the chips will all get away from that and then look at the body they don't like that either and if you bring a big snake into a chimp cage even if the chimps have never seen it like they'll get away from it and then stare at it and chimps out in the wild if they see a big snake they'll they'll stand there and they have a noise that means it's like holy crap that's a big snake you know it actually means that technically I'll tell you why in a minute but they get they stand away from it then they make this this noise which means oh my god look at the snake and then they'll stand there for like 24 hours looking at the snake and so the snakes are really really they're super stimuli for chimpanzees so that's pretty interesting in this chimp seem to learn how to take this dead snake and go scare other chips with it and that was that was hardly how he established his authority and you know and while there there's a there's a there's a threat and you like if I was you and I was around that chimp I would take that threat seriously because those things are no joke man and you see the same thing here with the I don't remember what kind of monkey that is but they're engaged in agonistic behavior and so from so and there has been by the way there has been recent research showing that in higher order primates that there is snake detection circuitry that's built into them right so it's not learned it's not learned deeper than that now for a long time psychologist psychologist knew for a long time that I could make you afraid in a conditioning experience experiment much faster using a snake or a picture of the snake than a gun or a picture of a gun so we can learn fear to snakes very rapidly spiders as well and so then people thought well maybe we were prepared to develop fear to snakes or spiders that sort of thing but the more recent research has indicated that it's more than just prepared is that we have the detection circuitry built right into us and well is because well why wouldn't we that's that's really the issue it's like it's not really that much of a surprise unless you think of human beings as a blank slate and if you think that been I don't know you should crawl out of the 16th century that's that's all I would look I would look at it because I mean that's that's that's just go on that idea it's it's it's so wrong so so maybe you can think about this as a dominance hierarchy but wolves look for those wolves look for credibility and competence as well and and chimpanzees don't like brutal tyrants and so we'll talk about it as the hierarchy of authority and so well this is kind of how it starts to develop you know you see well these girls are negotiating the domestic environment here and how to behave properly and how to share and all that and turn and take turns and so they're negotiating the hierarchy of authority and if you're good at reciprocity it's sometimes you're the authority and sometimes the other person is the authority that's fair play right and so these boys are doing the same thing and you see they're all smiling away and so it looks like aggressive behavior and people who are not very attentive and who are paranoid and who don't like human beings can confuse this with aggression and they forbid it at schools which is you know I know when my kids were going to school for example this was quite a while ago now they were forbidden to pick up snow on the off chance they might throw a snowball and we know how terrible that is so what I told my son was that he was perfectly welcome to Pelt any teacher he wanted to in the back of the head with the snowball as long as he was willing to suffer the consequences of doing it and I don't know if he ever did but he was happy with he was certainly happy with the idea which made me very happy about him so yeah so so you know kids need to do this they really really seriously need to do this it's what civilize is them and they that needs to happen between the ages of two and four because if they're not civilized by the time they're 4 then you might as well just forget it and that's a that's a horrible statistic but it's unbelievably well borne out in the relevant developmental literature like there's lots of aggressive two-year-olds most of them are male and if they stay aggressive past the age of four they tend to be lifetime aggressive they make no friends they're outcasts they're much more likely to end up antisocial criminal delinquent and in jail and so your kids need to be socialized between the ages of two and four and that's particularly true for the more aggressive males and most of the rest of two-year-olds are male and that isn't socialization by the way so there's a morenot more abstract representation of the same sort of thing and I'm trying to make the case that this that the that the hierarchy of authority emerges out of a game-like matrix an underlying game-like matrix and that's one of the things that one of the things that's so brilliant about Jean Piaget he figured that out it's so smart and he was interested in the biological origin of morality and he identified it he he he traced the origin to play and the emergence of morality out of play and that's it's so smart it's just I just can't believe how smart an idea that was because it's the bottom-up construction of of morality now Piaget was a constructionist and to some degree social constructionist he underestimated the role of biology but that doesn't invalidate his theory it's really easy to put a biological underpinning underneath underneath pas theory we know the biology well enough to do it quite quite nicely now so I mean we well the fact that tanks have for example could identify the play circuit is a really good start with that right because play has been around so long that we have a circuit that's dedicated to it and so that's that's a very very ancient that's a very ancient issue and so you know this is this is very much of an abstraction of a game here and then of course you get the ultimate abstraction in representation what in a representation like like that where even though even the landscape of the game is fictional and of course we've migrated to a large degree into those sorts of fictional landscapes fictional books movies video games so it's the same it's an extension of the same thing so practice for practice for real life the shades in some cases into real life itself so alright more representations of God the Father I like these representations I like the triangle idea I mean I don't know why God is wearing a triangular hat it's kind of a strange fashion choice but I think it's associated with the idea of the pyramid and I think that's associated with the idea of the hierarchy of authority and I think that's why the Egyptians put their pharaohs inside pyramids I know there's more to it than that but I think some of that has to do with the notion of this hierarchical structure you see this on that now that's speculative obviously and I don't want to make too much of it but but I can't help but think that there's something to that see that's on the back of the American dollar bill I like that a lot that's like the Eye of Horus from the Egyptians and so the idea here is something like at the top of the hierarchy is something that is no longer part of the hierarchy right so if you move up the hierarchy enough what happens is that you develop the ability as a consequence of moving up that hierarchy to be detached enough from the hierarchy so you're no longer really part of it and so that you can move in all sorts of different hierarchies and the thing the idea here is that the thing that you're really developing is the capacity to pay attention and I would say from a from mythological perspective the the one thing that seems to compete with the idea of the spoken word as the as the source of the extraction of habitable order from chaos is the I is the capacity to pay attention so Marduk for example the Mesopotamian Creator God who emerged in the hierarchy of Mesopotamian gods and came out at the top right he was the victor of the gods he had eyes all the way around his head and he could speak magic words and I really like that I really like that idea and the Egyptians developed that idea too because their god Horus was the eye everyone knew was the Eye of Horus that that sense that image is so compelling that we still know about everybody has seen the Eye of Horus with a really open pupil and what the Egyptians learned was that the open eye was what revivified the Dead Society it's so smart so what do you do if your life isn't in order bloody well pay attention and that isn't the same as thinking it's a different process paying attention thinking is like the imposition of structure in some sense I know I'm oversimplifying but paying attention is something like watching for what you don't know and so like one of the things I often recommend to my clinical clients if they're having trouble with a family member is number one shut up don't tell them anything about yourself just and I don't mean in a rude way it's just like no more personal information number two watch them like a hawk and listen and if you do that long enough they will tell you exactly what they're up to and they will also tell you who they think you are and then you'll be shocked because they think you're something generally speaking that's not like you what you are at all and when they tell you it's like a revelation to both of you but attention is an unbelievably powerful force and you see this in psychotherapy too because a lot of what you do and in any reparative relationship is really pay attention to another person pay attention and listen and you would not believe what people will tell you or reveal to you if you watch them as if you want to know instead of watching them so that you'll have your prejudices reinforced that's usually how people interact is like I want to keep thinking about you the way I'm thinking about you and so I'm going to filter out anything that just proves my theory that's not what I'm talking about at all it's like I'm going to watch you and figure out what you're up to not in a rude way none of that I just want to see what's there and that'll be good for you probably and also be good for me and so well so that's the idea that you know climbing up a hierarchy of authority can give you vision and that vision can transcend the actual hierarchy and I think that's also the I think that's also the that's the metaphysical space that an artist occupies because artists really aren't in a hierarchy there outside of hierarchies you've watched the Lion King most of you yeah that's that zoo you know the little bird that's the eye of the king that's the same thing there so and that's that's echoed in this idea as well so so well that's some more more ideas of hierarchies same idea this is right gold silver bronze why gold gold is the Sun Gold is pure right so the idea is that the thing that's at the top of the hierarchy is incorruptible because gold doesn't mix with anything else right it's this sort of metal that doesn't ever become corrupted it's a noble metal it doesn't become corrupted and so it shines like the Sun and it's associated with what's ever at the top of the hierarchy and the gold the gold medal is a disc like the Sun and it's awarded to those people who occupied the top position and who are manifestations of the ideal and here's here's I can tell you a quick story so imagine that you're watching an Olympic contest I found this happens to me very often with gymnastics because the gymnasts are so absolutely unbelievable you know so you go watch the gymnastic performance and the verse is out there bouncing around like you know you can't even imagine doing it they're so perfect at it so you see this person they're going through this routine they're just absolutely spectacular and flawless at it you know at the end they stop and everybody claps and and they're all excited to see what a human being can do and that's why we're in the audience watching because we want to see what a human being can do and the judges go like 9.8 9.8 9.8 everybody's thrilled and then the next contestant comes out and it's like well they're just basically screwed right it's like this person came out there and was perfect how are you going to top that that's an interesting question because this is a representation of what you do to top perfection itself and you can do it and here's how you do it and you know this even though you don't know you know it so let's say the next contestant comes out they're kind of shaky because it's like oh man the bar is being raised high so what they do is they put themselves right on the edge of chaos and you can tell by watching them that they are one bloody fraction of a second from catastrophe they're pushing themselves farther than they've ever gone in the direction of their perfection and everyone in the room is so tense they can hardly stand it right you can hear a pin drop and that person is flipping around it they're just it's just right on the edge of catastrophe and at the end they go like this you know and there's that gesture of triumph that goes along with that and everybody rises in one instant and just claps like mad it's like well why what are you doing what are you doing when you're doing that right you can't even help it it grabs you right in the core of your being and you stand up and it's it's an act of worship that's what it is and you saw someone go beyond their perfection into the domain of chaos and establish order right in front of your eyes and you're so thrilled about that you know you're happy to be alive and everyone's celebrating it all at the same time and it's an absolutely amazing thing and that's what well sometimes that's what this represents and sometimes that's what this represents and that's what we're trying to get at because that's at the pinnacle of the hierarchy right not only are you doing what you should be doing but you're doing it in a way that increases the probability that you'll do it better the next time you do it and then you could say here's another thing to think about along the same lines and I know we haven't got that out of an easy yet you tell your kids to play fair right you say Norman it's not whether not you win it's how you play the game and you say that you don't really know what you mean you feel kind of stupid saying it even though you know it's true and your kid looks at you like there's something wrong with you because he doesn't know what you're talking about either but you know it's true and so here's why it's true life isn't a game it's a set of games and the rule is never sacrifice victory across the set of games for victory and one game right and that's what it means to play properly you want to play so that people keep inviting you to play because that's how you win right you win by being invited to play the largest possible array of games and the way you do that is by manifesting the fact that you can play in a reciprocal manner every time you play even if there's victory at stake and that's what makes you successful across time and we all know that and we even tell our kids that but we don't know that we know it and so we're not adapting ourselves to the game and victory in the game we're adapting ourselves to the metagame and victory across the set of all possible games and that's what that well that's exactly what as far as I can tell that's exactly what this is aiming at to that that's the same idea that there's that there's a transit there's a mode of being that transcends the particularities of the of the localized contests that's the other way to think about it and to act morally is not to win today's contest at the expense of the rest of possible contests and again I don't see that as something that's arbitrary it's not relativistic there's an absolute moral an absolute moral stance there and everyone recognizes it and and I also think it's the key to success and I would also say it's very much akin in a strange way like the the the person who is the master at being invited to play the largest possible games number of games is also the same person I haven't quite figured out the precise relationship between these two is also the same person that goes out forthrightly to conquer the unknown before it presents itself as the enemy at the door they're the same thing now I don't I can't haven't figured well why that is exactly but but well I'll figure it out eventually and when I do I'll don't tell you well if you're interested so okay so here's the mother no ideas of God as as hierarchical authority figures so strip the religious preconceptions off what you observe and just look at what you see well look there's primate looking upward ad dominance figure that's that's what you see there now it's very interestingly symbolically represented because you have gone the farther there with the cross and I think what that means as far as I can tell is that there's a recognition there in the image that the person who's most dominant is the one who's or the most have the most authority is the one who's voluntarily accepted the suffering that's part of being and that's what that picture represents it's like the authority holds that says this is what you have to accept and that that that that transfix is the viewer because of because of the fact that it's true and you think well is that true okay well think about it this way do you like brave people or do you like cowards well that that's pretty straightforward and what's the ultimate act of bravery it's to come to terms with the fact that you're mortal and limited and to live forthrightly regardless well obviously that's at the core of what's of what's admirable and why would we presume that that's not the case we act as if that's the case it's what everyone dreams and wishes that they could they could do I mean assuming that you know you've dispensed with the idea that you're going to be immortal I suppose that might be worth wishing for too or or perhaps not immortal is a very long time but you certainly want this and that image says well this is what you should be and you know we've got that same opening into the sky going on in that image that I showed you before it's like this is a transcendent truth that constantly reman efest itself across time and space and Jung would say it's built into your psyche that image now you know there are elements of it that are culturally constructed it wouldn't necessarily have to be the cross although the cross is a very old symbol it's far older than then it's use in Christianity it has been used in many many religious representations but that echoes the soul echoes with that you know and well then there's Moses up there on the on the Mount receiving these the the law and so we'll talk a lot more about that when we get to Exodus but if yeah yeah yeah if we get to Exodus so well look where does it happen well on the mountain well that's a pyramid that's up right that's optics up it's it's up in stratosphere is up in the sky where where you look upward okay and and then so what's happening to Moses well here here's a bit of a clue as far as I can tell I figured this out partly again by reading Jean Piaget because one of the things that PSA said about kids was that they first learned to play a game but they don't know what the rules are meaning that if you have a bunch of kids together they can play a game but if you take one of the kids out of the game when they're young say six and you say what the rule are what are the rules they can only sort of give you a representation so you take six-year-old one and he'll tell you some of the rules and six-year-old two will tell you different rules and and you know six-year-old three will tell you different rules but if you put them all together they can play so they have the knowledge embodied either individually or in the group the knowledge is there to be extracted well then they get a little older they can extract the rules and then they start to play by the rules and then the CSA's last step was well they didn't just the kids play by the rules that they learned that they can make the rules and he thought about that as moral progression first you can play then you can play by the rules then you learn maybe because he didn't think everyone learned this that you're actually the master of the rules that doesn't mean the rules are arbitrary but it means that you could be the generator of the rule that's assuming that you know how to play the game and he thought about that as a moral moral progression and then I thought well that's exactly what happened to Moses in in the story of Exodus because Moses is out there leading all those Israelites around and like they don't have a law they don't have a lawgiver they have a tradition and they're all like crabby because both are in a desert it's like they're in a tyranny but now they're in a desert it's like that's no improvement so they're really getting pretty bitchy about it and so they're worshipping false idols and having one catastrophe after another and they get Moses to judge their conflicts so he does that for god only knows how long forever crabby Israelites come to Moses and bitch at him it's like wow he did this and she did that and and so then he has to figure out how to make peace and he does that so long that one of his I think it's his father-in-law tells him he has to stop doing it because he's going to exhaust himself well then you think well what's happening well and I'm not assuming that this is a like a literal historical story I think again it's a condensation well any group has a set of customs just like a wolf pack does and so then the customs are being manifest in someone who's a genius is watching and thinking okay well what's the rule in this situation what's the rule in this situation what's the rule in this situation and then in his imagination the rules turn into a hierarchy and then he goes up on the mountain just bang and he thinks oh my god here's the rules that we've been living by all this time and that's the revelation of the commandments well and you think well how else could it be you think the rules came first and baying them came second it's like no the rules come first sorry the actions come first the obeying them comes first and then you figure out what everybody's up to you say hey look this is what you've been up to all along everybody goes oh yeah that seems to make sense peak and if it didn't who would follow them no one was going to follow them if they don't match what's already there you just think about that is unjust and so that's that's portrayed here as a cataclysmic human event it's like oh my god we've been chimpanzees we've been in this hierarchy of authority for so long we have no idea what we're doing and all of a sudden poof it bursts into revelatory consciousness and we could say here is the law and you say well is it given by God well hey it depends on what you mean by God we could start with that presupposition but it's not like it just came out of nowhere it took it and this is something else Nietzsche observed so interestingly and he said you know that a moral revelation was the consequence of a tremendously long process of initial construction and then formulation thousands and thousands and thousands and thousands of years of custom a building custom before you get the revelation of the articulated law and that's a description of the pattern that works let's say well what's the pattern that works it's the game that you can play with everybody else day after day with no degeneration and that's another thing Piaget figured out it's so brilliant and that's his idea of the equilibrate state it's an extension of the menu' accounts idea about the universe maksim right act in a way so that each action could become a universal rule that was kinda mental moral Maxim and PSA put a twist on that he said no no that's not exactly yet it's act in such a way that it works for you now and next week and next month and next year and ten years from now and so that while it's working for you it's also working for the people around you and for the broader society and then and that's the equilibrate estate and you could think about that as an intimation of the kingdom of the City of God on earth it's something like that and it's based on this idea that a morality has to be iterable and you know there's lots of there's been lots of simulations online already artificial intelligence simulations of trading games right I mean the people who've been studying the emergence of moral behavior say in artificial intelligence systems have already caught on to the idea that one of the crucial elements to the analysis of morality is inner ability you can't play a degenerating game because because it degenerates like obviously you want to play a game that at least remains stable across time and God if you could really get your act together maybe it would slowly get better and of course that's what you'd hope for your family right that's what you're always trying to do unless you're completely hell-bent on revenge and destruction it's like is there a way that we can continue to play together that will make playing together even better the next day that's what you're up to and well I don't see anything arbitrary about that and part of it this is also why I think that bloody post modernists are so incorrect because you know they say something like there's an infinite number of interpretations of the world and that's actually true but then they make a mistake and they say well no interpretation is to be privileged over any other interpretation it's like wrong wrong that's that's where things go seriously off the rails because the interpretation has to be and this is the piagetian objection is like if you and i are going to play a game rule one is we both have to want to play rule two is other people are going to let us play rule 3 is we should be able to play it across a pretty long period of time without it degenerating and maybe rule 4 is well we're playing the world shouldn't kill us it's like there are not very many gay like you don't send your kids out to play on the superhighway right so they're not playing hockey on the superhighway because the world kills them and so there's an infinite number of interpretations but there is not an infinite number of solutions and the solutions are constrained by the fact of the world and are suffering in the world and then also constrained by the fact that we constrain each other and so that's that's where I think that's gone like dreadfully dreadfully wrong so all right it's really fun to look at these old pictures once you kind of know what they mean you know the leaf that's what I've discovered is that once I kind of understand the underlying rationale for I mean someone worked hard on that that's an engraving right they took a long time making that picture they're serious about it and when you understand what it means you know all those people there their prostate prostrate at the at the at the revelation of the law it's like well no wonder it's like break the law and see what happens breaks the universal moral law man and see what happens you know I see people in that situation well as you all do all the time perhaps me more than you because I'm a clinical psychologist you know and if the people I'm seeing haven't broken the universal law then you can bloody well be sure that people around them have it's no joke like you make a mistake and things will go seriously wrong for you and so it's no wonder that you'd be terrified at the revelation of the structure that governs our being one of the things that's so remarkable about the old testament this is another thing needs to comment a dog he was a real admirer of the Old Testament not so much of the New Testament he thought it was a sin for Europe to have glued the New Testament on to the Old Testament because he thought the Old Testament was a really accurate representation of the phenomenology of ba it's like stay awake speak properly be honest or watch the hell out because things will come your way that you just do not want to see at all and it might not just be you it might be everyone you know and everything about your culture that is demolished for for generation after generation it's like stay awake and be careful and I like I think that people only don't believe that when they're being hubristic and I think that most people know that deep in their hearts you know when you get high on your horse that happens fairly often if you have any sense you think geez I better be careful top myself down and fare a bit because if I get too puffed up man something's going to come along and take me out at the knees and everyone knows that pride comes before a fall it's like if you have any that's why it says in the Old Testament that fear of God is the beginning of wisdom it's like I've never in all my years as a clinical psychologist and this is something that really does terrify me I have I have never seen anyone ever get away with anything at all even once you know there's that old idea that God has a book you know and keeps track of everything in heaven it's like okay okay you know maybe it's not a book fine but that is a really useful thing to think about because well maybe you disagree maybe you think people get away with things all the time I tell you I've never seen it what I see instead is that thing happens right they someone twists the fabric of reality and they do it successfully because it doesn't snap back at them that moment and then like two years later something unravels and they get walloped and they think oh my god that's so unfair and then we track it it's like but what happened before that this and then what this and then what this and then what oh oh this well that's where it went wrong it's yeah because you can't twist the fabric of reality without having it snap back it doesn't work that way and why would it because what are you going to do twist the fabric of reality I don't think so I think it's bigger than you you know and I think that one of the things that really tempts people is the idea that well I can get away with it it's like yeah you try you see oh well that works it's like you get away with nothing and that is the beginning of wisdom and I it's something that deeply terrifies me and you know err ever since last September when I came to board like broader public attention one of the thing I'd be terrified of making mistake because I certainly know I'm more than capable of making a mistake and going so far either I haven't made one or no one found out about it so but it's like you know we walk on a very thin and narrow edge and we're very lucky when things aren't degenerating into chaos around us or rapidly moving too far too much order and it's not an easy thing to stay on that line and you can tell when you say you're on that line because the things are deeply meaningful and engaging when you're on that line but if you're not existentially terrified about the consequences of wavering off that then you are truly not awake so and that's what I see in this picture you know it's like look out man because there are rules and if you break them god help you so one of the things that seems to me the case with regard this in the question period a bit last time is that one of the things that seems to be actually one of the advantages to gluing the New Testament on to the Old Testament is the idea of a transformation and morality that is analogous to the PIA jetty an idea that after you learn to play by the rules you can learn to make the rules because I think that's actually what happens to some degree in the transition between the Old Testament and the New Testament because in the Old Testament most morality is prohibition here are things you shouldn't do it's like no fair enough that's a lot of what you do with your kids don't do this don't do this don't especially when they're happy you're always going around telling them to stop being so happy because all they're doing is causing trouble it's quite painful if you're a parent and you notice that but the first morality is prohibition right control yourself so you don't cause too much trouble and then maybe if you get that down and you're good at it then the next thing is well once you're disciplined then you can start working toward something that's a positive good and that's the transformation that seems to me to be fundamentally characteristic of the juxtaposition of the New Testament on to the Old Testament but in these images is still something like serve tradition serve the father psychologically speaking support the tradition because you live on it they're in an old Mesopotamian story the enumeration you can which you can read about if you're interested in the original gods who are really badly behaved they're like two year old in fact they're a lot like two year olds they kill the primordial gone absolute pea tree Oracle God they kill him and try to live on his corpse well that's what we all do right because we live on the corpse of our ancestors you could say we live on the corpse of our culture it's dead and that's not a great place to live so you have to keep revivifying it so the damn thing you know stays active and awake you you stay on the carbs for too long and then the devil or the demon of chaos comes back and that's what happens in the Mesopotamian story it's like don't be thinking that you can stay on the corpse of your ancestors for too long without contributing to the revivification of the system because the chaos that all of that holds that that all that holds that bay will definitely come and visit you you see that in stories like The Hobbit you know hobbits they're nice they like to eat they're kind of fat they're shorts are not very bright you know they're hubristic they have no idea what's out there in the broader world they're protected if you remember by the Striders who are the sons of great kings who look like tramps they have nothing but contempt for them they patrol the borders and keep the bloody hobbits safe but out there out there in the periphery all hell is brewing and chaos is is is generating and forming and that's an archetypal story and that's why people like that story so much because that's exactly right like we're the hobbits and there are we are protected from chaos by the spirits of our dead ancestors and we're too damn stupid to know it and we think oh well we don't need them anymore and that to me that's post-modernism that's what the bloody universities are doing with the humanities to absolutely appalling and we will pay for it so unless we wake up and hopefully we'll wake up because that would be better than paying for it even though being awake as well they're painful so so then I had this vision one time and I kind of portrayed it in this in this image of what the world was like and I thought well it's not a pyramid it's not a single hierarchy of authority that's not what it is it's it's an array of hierarchies of authority so you imagine this sort of infinite plane and the the infinite plane there's nothing but pyramids and inside the pyramids there are strata of people everywhere far as you can look some of the pyramids are tall some of them are short they overlap it's endless the plain is endless and those are all the positions to which you could rise and everybody's inside the pyramid sort of crammed up trying to move towards the top and then there's the possibility of sailing across over top of all of them and seeing how the structure itself works and that's and that's the eye that floats above the pyramid and it sees the structure itself and the highest order of being is not to be at the top of the pyramid it's to use the discipline that you attain by striving towards the top of the pyramid to release yourself from the pyramid and move one step up and that's I think that's one of the things that's instantiated in the idea of the for example of the Holy Ghost so and I think that's akin to that that's Sisyphus and needs a set of Sisyphus if I remember correctly that one has to imagine him happy well if there's a rock at the bottom of the hill then you might as well push it up the hill and if it rolls back down well then you've got something else to do don't you can push the damn rock back up the hill and there's no shortage of rocks to put up to push up the hill and that's what we're built for anyways and so let's go out and like push some damn boulders up the hill and then maybe we could have enough self-confidence and enough enough respect for ourselves that we wouldn't have to turn to hatred and revenge and try to take everything down because I think that's the alternative so he's not weak that's one thing you can say about him the same idea represented there right that's outlets who voluntarily takes the world on his shoulders it's like the idea of Christ taking the sins of the world on his shoulders it's exactly the same notion which is the notion that you should be able to recognize in yourself all the horror of humanity and take responsibility for it because that's what that means and the thing that's so interesting about that is that if you can recognize yourself in yourself all the horror of humanity you will instantly have a hell of a lot more respect for yourself than you did before you did that because there's some real utility and knowing that you're a monster now on just because you're a monster doesn't mean you have to be a monster but it's really useful to know that you are one so then and one of the things that you knew and this is something that I find so amazing about his writing is I think something that really distinguishes him for example from Joseph Campbell who talked about following your bliss is like Jung said very clearly that the first step to enlightenment is the encounter with the shadow and what he meant by that was everything horrible that human beings have done was done by human beings and you're one of them and so if you don't understand that and to understand that really means to know how it was that you could have done it and that's a shattering thing to try to imagine that to try to imagine yourself as someone who's engaged in medieval torture to see how you could in fact do that you're never the same after you learn that but being never the same after learning that is unbelievably useful because when you understand that that's what you're like then you're a whole different creature and I don't think and this is something I did learn from Jung is that you cannot be a good person until you know how much evil you contain within you it is not possible and it's partly because you just don't have any potency like if you're just naive if you're just nice if you'd never hurt anyone you'd never hurt a fly you don't have the capability for any of that why would anyone ever take you seriously you're you're just you're a domestic animal at best you know and a rather contemptible one at that and it's a very strange thing because you wouldn't think that the revelation of the capacity for evil is a precondition for the realization of good but I believe first of all why would you be serious enough to even attempt to pursue the good unless you had some sense of what the consequence was of not doing it you have to be serious about these sorts of things it's not it's not it's not the game of a child right it's the game of a fully developed adult and you have learned this in part when I had little kids I wrote a chapter from my new book called never let your children do anything that makes you dislike them and why was that and I read I read that wrote that after I knew I was a monster and I thought I'm going to make sure I liked my kids I'm going to make sure they behave around me so that I like them because I'm Way bigger than them and I'm Way more cruel than they are and I've got tricks up my sleeve that they cannot even possibly imagine and if if they irritate me I will absolutely take it out on them and if you don't think that you're the sort of person that would do that then you are the sort of person who is doing it you know we're not going to get that amenity ha ha aria I watched this great documentary once called Hitman Hart and was about Bret Hart and who was the most famous Canadian in the world for a while and he was a worldwide Wrestling Federation wrestler you know and he was a good guy and he came from this famous family of wrestlers who all came from Alberta I think there were seven brothers who were wrestlers and seven sisters and all the sisters married wrestlers and they were all offspring children of Stu Hart who was a wrestling impresario like 40 years ago and it was it was such a cool documentary because I was always wondering why in the world did people watch wrestling and and then believe it you know believe it do you believe movies when you go watch them it's like that's a hard question to answer while you're there you do and so if you're watching wrestling and you're a wrestling fan do you believe it well it is a matter of belief it's a matter of being engaged in a drama and there are different levels of drama right so let's say worldwide Wrestling Federation drama is not the most sophisticated form of drama okay but I'm not being a not being a smart aleck when I'm saying that there is drama of different sophistication for different people and that's also why religious truths exist at multiple levels simultaneously right it is got to be something in it for everyone and that's a hard belief system that's a hard system to put together something for the unbelievably sophisticated and something for the common person okay so we have wrestling and Bret Hart was a good guy and he fell into the archetype of being a good guy and that's partly what the what the story's about it was a bit too much for him but um one of the things that he he laid out so carefully where because he figured that 120 million people knew him something like that and that everywhere he went he was treated like a hero and he found out quite a bit of quite a burden as you could imagine if you think about it but he portrayed what was happening in the wrestling ring as classic good against evil but not conceptualized and discussed right embodied thought out acted out you know like like the like Thor and the Hulk except like right in front of you and so well that's exactly this sort of thing I mean we could consider hockey more sophisticated than wrestling perhaps and as I said I'm not being a critic of these I'm not being critically minded about these things I understand their purpose and I would highly recommend that documentary it's a brilliant documentary but this is it's the same thing it's a silver cup right it's like there's the hero of the team that's the hero of the team's you know here's something cool if you're the fan of the Toronto Blue Jays are the Toronto Maple Leafs of course this hardly ever happens to you if you're the fan of the Toronto Maple Leafs because they always lose but haha but but if you're watching a game and your team wins and we take your testosterone levels then they went up and if you watch the Toronto Maple Leafs and they lost and you're a fan then your testosterone levels go down so that's pretty damn funny you know I mean really don't you see how deeply instantiated this is in people I mean it bloody well alters your biochemistry like your your your testosterone levels it's all more my team loss you know it's like ah do we know there'll be nothing in it for the wife tonight you know yeah well this is the cosmos I think from from the phenomenological perspective and one of the things that that that has come to my realization is that this is real this is real it's not a metaphor it's way deeper than a metaphor the most real things about life are the place you don't know and the place you know and you could say well that's explored territory and unexplored territory that's real and it's been around forever back to the lobsters you know if you put lobsters in their new place the first thing they do is go around their territory finding places to hide and also making a burrow so the first thing they do is establish what they know against what they don't know and that's real it's real from the Darwinian perspective and we're going to say that what's real from the Darwinian perspective is plenty real enough because we're alive and everything and so that sort of thing matters like well that's what this is the Taoist symbol that's what it says is that what way it says what is experience made of eternally that's easy chaos and order and in every bit of chaos there's the possibility of order and in every bit of order there's the possibility of chaos and that's the way right that's the path of life that's life itself and where you're supposed to be is right on the border between the two of those and why is that stable enough engaged enough right so not only are you doing what you should be doing you're doing in a way that increases the probability that you'll do it better tomorrow and you can tell when you're doing that because you're engaged you're in the right time and place and your your neurology tells you that that's what meaning is that's what transcendent meaning is and that's so cool because I also think that that is the antidote to existential suffering the antidote to existential suffering is to be at the right place at the right time and you know you want to get technical about it okay anxiety and pain that's the cause that's the reality of the existential so suffering okay so let's say you're in the right place at the right time what happens to you biochemically dopaminergic activation what does that do suppresses anxiety and it's analgesic now it's more than that because also produces positive emotion and the desire to move forward and it underlies creativity and and so so not only do you get the positive engagement from a neurochemical perspective you get the analgesia and you get the anti end and you get the reduction of anxiety so it's not hypothetical it's and it is the case that the dopaminergic systems those are the exploratory systems unbelievably ancient and archaic are activated when you're optimally positioned to be to be what incorporating new information which is what human beings do because we're information foragers and so we want to be secure but building on our security at the same time and then we want to do it for ourselves we want to do it for other people we want to do it for our families we want to do it for broader society we want to bring the whole world together in alignment to do that and that's meaningful and god only knows what we could do about the suffering of the world if we did that you know we have no idea what we could do if we started doing things properly and maybe so many of the things that dismay us about life we could we could stop I mean we stopped a lot of them in the last hundred years you know things are a lot better than they were a hundred years ago obviously they're not perfect but a hundred years ago 120 years ago man you know the average person in the Western world lived on less than a dollar a day in today's dollars it's like you just try that for a week and see how much fun that is so the Daoists well what is this well this is the pre cosmogonic chaos out of which the Word of God extracted habitable order at the beginning of time it's the same thing it's the same thing and that chaos we'll talk a bit more about that later I guess because it's a very complicated thing to to describe but it's certainly the thing that when you encounter the chaos is what you encounter when the Twin Towers fall right you remember what that was like right so it was it was September 10th well that was the world everyone knew what the world was like and then it was September 11th and everyone walked around day for three days because the building's failed but so what you can see a building fall you can understand what it's what happens when a building falls so then what's going on with the being dazed well it's the chaos that underlies our how to the Lord have manifested itself in those buildings collapse was a brilliant act of terrorism and everyone was frozen and curious because that's how we react to that sort of thing the it's like it's like the shark you know remember that famous that famous movie poster for Jaws with the woman swimming on the top of the water and that terrible Leviathan shark underneath coming up to to take her out well that's life man that's the world and now and then you see that and when something Falls like the Twin Towers fall you remember that the ocean below you the abyss right the primordial abyss that bloody thing is deep and then you're fragile and that happens when someone betrays you and it's happened it happens to you when your dreams fall apart you encounter that chaos again from which the world is extracted and then you're called upon to act out attention and the word in order to bring the world back into order and none of that is none of that is superstitious none of that is superstitious none of that's even metaphorical it's real its ribs more real than anything else and I think the reason for that in part is that this has been it's been this way forever right as long as there's been life this has been the rule of life and that's the cosmos that's reality that's what we inhabit and so one of the things you know the the so-called New Atheists and I they don't want to go on a tangent about New Atheists because I think atheists are often remarkably honest and very consistent in their analysis so but I just don't think they're taking the problem seriously that like I don't think they take their evolutionary theorizing nearly with the seriousness that it that it necessitates and I don't think that I don't think that you can dispute the proposition that the longer something has had a selection effect life the more real it is it's the fundamental axiom of Darwinian biology and I think the Darwinian world is more real than the physical world that was the argument that I was trying to have with with Sam Harris and I didn't do the world's best job with that although it went not too bad the second time but it's it's not something to be taken lightly it's a very serious profound and meaningful proposition and people act it out and want to act it out whether they know it or not that's Marduk so the story of Marduk I'll just give it to you very briefly time at an apse who are locked in embrace at the beginning of time goddess of saltwater God of freshwater together chaos an order right they give rise masculine feminine they give rise to the world of the elder gods and those are to me their primordial motivational forces or something like that and their rage and their lust and their love and all these things that possess us that are there forever and they're out in the world acting and they carelessly slay absolu their father and they're making a racket and then they collapse ooh and then time at gives wind of that and that's a timeout right there by the way she's kind of a rough looking creature and she's a mother of all things and so she's not very happy about this they said though these her children have destroyed structure itself plus they're noisy and careless and so she thinks all right just like Noah just like the God that brings the flood to know what exactly the same idea time ad comes back it says yeah okay enough is enough I'm going to take you out and she makes this battalion of monsters and puts the worst monster there is at the head of the battalion his name is king he's like a precursor to the idea of Satan and she lets the gods know hey I'm coming for you and so they're not very happy about this because their gods but like yeah she's chaos itself right she gave birth to everything this is no joke and so they send one God out after another to confront her and they all come back with the tails between their legs there's no hope and then one day there's a new God that emerges in that Marduk and the gods know as soon as he pops up they know he's something new remember and this is happening while the Mesopotamians are assembling themselves into one of the world's first great civilizations so all the gods of all those tribes are coming together to organize themselves into a hierarchy to figure out what proposition rules everything and so Marduk is elected by all the gods and he says look I'll go out there and I'll take on time at but here's the rule from here on you follow me I determine destiny I'm the top god I'm the thing at the top of the hierarchy and all the other gods say hey look no problem you get rid of chaos we do exactly what you say now Marduk he has eyes all the way around his head and he speaks magic words those are his primary attributes and so he takes a net and he goes out to confront time out and and he he he encloses her in a net which i think is so cool because it's an encapsulation right it's a conceptual encapsulation he encloses chaos itself in a conceptual structure he puts it in the net and then he cuts her into pieces and he makes the world and then then he creates human beings to inhabit that world and to serve the gods and he creates human beings out of the blood of king of the worst of the demons and that took me to call into young as the student might help me figure that out I thought that's pretty damn pessimistic it's like you know what exactly it sounds like a fall metaphor it's like the idea of original sin but but our joint conclusion with regards to that with it human beings are the only creatures in creation that can truly deceive right we have the capacity for evil just like it says in the Adam and Eve story we can actually do that and that's why we're made out of the blood of king of the king of the demons the we are the thing that can deceive that can twist the structure of reality well so Marduk now the Mesopotamians had an emperor right and the emperor was the avatar of Marduk that's what made him Emperor he was only at Emperor if he was going to be Marduk he had to be a good Marduk which Mantia do confront time at chaos and cut her off and make or out of her pieces and what the method name is used to do at the New Year's celebration they go outside the walled city and that's explored territory versus unexplored territory they go outside their walled city into chaos and they bring all the statues that represented the gods and they'd act this out because they're trying to figure something out right you're trying to figure out what this means they're acting it out and then they take their Emperor and the priest would make them kneel and they'd take all his king equally all his king uniform off his Emperor uniform off and make him kneel and humiliate him and nail him with a glove and say okay how were you not a good Marduk this year right and then he'd recount all the ways that he was inadequate in confronting chaos and then they do the celebration and Marduk would win and and the king would go sleep with a royal prostitute and and the reason for that was it's the same idea st. George pulling the Virgin from the dragon it's exactly the same idea that if you call if you encounter the reptilian chaos you can extract something out of it with which if you unite you produce creative order that's what they were acting out and that was the basis for the Mesopotamian idea of sovereignty it's so smart it's so unbelievably smart and you know the Mesopotamians had a massive influence on the civilizations that then had a massive influence on assets one of the stories of how the notion of sovereignty itself came to be it's the evolution of the idea of God that's one way of thinking about it but even more importantly it's the evolution of the idea of the redemptive human being right and that's taken - it's one of its conclusions following the story of Buddha but also in the story of Christ the idea of the perfect individual and the notion is well that's the word that speaks truth into chaos at the beginning of time to generate habitable order that is good that's the story and so with that let's see oh sure I'll just show you these pictures because they're so interesting once you know what they mean they're so cool that's a symbol of infinity let's Hercules and Hydra what's life like cut off one head what happens seven more grow right what do you do run hold well no that's not what you do it this is what you do you fight it it's the it's the chaos that generates partial chaos it's the ultimate chaos that generates partial chaos but that chaos also is what revista finds life because otherwise it would just be static mercury the head of the Hydra right freeze of you I'd Saint George he's doing it peacefully which is so interesting right he's got a beatific look on his face in that particular representation another Saint George right the Virgin in the background I think that's say Dan if I remember correctly st. George is the patron saint of England here's an interesting one this actually sheds light on on the human proclivity for warfare st. George that's a Muslim soldier it's really easy to transform the enemy into the dragon right because the enemy is often the predator and we do that instantaneously right without a second thought and so then we can go to war morally because why not take out the snakes well you know the problem is where are the snakes or maybe they're outside and maybe they're not maybe they're in this room and even worse maybe they're in you and that's wisdom when you know that their review why wouldn't she be happy about that especially if she had a especially if she had a child right seriously and that's horace right the god of vision and he was a he was a Falken because falcons have great vision and they fly above everything and they can see everything so that was the Egyptian created god Horus and I'll tell you the story about Horus at some points well now here are some pictures that demonstrate what I had described as the emergence of let's say the meta hero out of the hero so there's the person you admire and then there's the set of people that you admire and then there's the meta set of admirable people and the extraction of that ideal as far as I can tell that's just what's portrayed in these images that's a great one it's very sophisticated image you see that the two sides of Christ's face are not symmetrical one is God in ones man that's what that icon means and so the fully developed person in this representation it's one of the oldest representations of this sort that we know the idea is that there's a there's a human person in his ordinariness let's say and then there's this this kinship with the divine that's associated with the willing adoption of the responsibilities of moral mortal being and that produces this union and then it's manifest in a book right because that's speech and it's associated with the son right it's the proper way of being and that's a perfect example I think of the emergence of the archetype out of the multitude that's what it looks like to me and so I guess now we're done with Genesis one and took three lectures but God's complicated you know that's the thing so so thank you and next week by all appearances that's where we are so we've got 20 minutes for questions so in the past I've done some work with blog Big Brother Big Sister and whatever that being said that the most common story I tend to hear from Pacific youth is that they write they're raised in a single family home usually with a mom daddy's there on a picture in alcoholic whatever whatever the writer so we have this child who is trying to seek ways to make himself healthy and empower himself in a ways that a healthy father should have done so you know between the formative years of like 1 to 4 so I think you know I'm going with this how let's say for someone who born without like a good father figure where would they go out in the world or like what for series of incidents where they try to expose themselves to to like gain access to that balancing of health and knowledge that a father though a good father figure should have provided to in the first place ok well partly I mean certainly to some degree a good mother can provide that right to some degree although it's hard for one person to be everything right you know and I think one of the conundrums that face women and this is a tough one and this is why I think women are higher in trade agreeableness and higher and trade negative emotion is that you know the primary problem that a woman has with an infant is why not throw it out a window because it's very annoying right I mean it's there all the time it's constant demand it's absolutely constant amount tremendous dependency and so a woman has to be tilted towards mercy that's how it looks to me right and especially during it's so important during the especially the first year when children are so unbelievably vulnerable and so I think it's very difficult for women to be merciful like that and to make the shift to encouraging disciplinarian I think that's a very difficult thing for people to do simultaneously although you know people people I'm not saying that women are always only merciful and men are always only encouraging disciplinarians but things do sort themselves out to some degree like that and I think also the biochemical transformations that accompany pregnancy and childbirth and lactation also tilt a mother towards that as well we have to really love that little thing right it's it's number one no matter what it demands and then telling it what to do and making sure it's behaving properly that's that's a whole different issue now but the kids who lack fathers I mean first of all they can find that to some degree in their friends and that's often what father boys do in particular they go into gangs and they generate the missing men masculinity in the game well that's not so good because like what the hell do they know well they don't know anything right they're just stupid kids and they're like fifteen years old and the testosterone is pumping and they're trying to get the hell away from their mother which is what they're supposed to do and and they're not in the right position to exercise any authority over themselves so that's that's not good they can find it in education they can find it in books they can find it in movies they can find it in sports heroes and so forth because the image of the father is fragmented and distributed among the community but it's very very difficult to not have a father right and you know one of the things that we're doing in our society which i think is I think it's absolutely appalling is that we're making the case that all families are equal it's like sorry no wrong then there's no empirical data supporting that proposition by the way it's much better for kids to have two parents know who those parents are that's a whole different issue okay and if I could just add one more thing of how would you ask that question so let's see a daughter was raised not a father because she would all see have different ways to find those fragments of her missing father than like a boy would instead because obviously they're raised differently at least they should have been well I think it's the same issue you know I mean I think that another danger that emerges mrs. Freud's of course famous observation is that you know if there's mom and child were father and child that relationship can get a little closer than it should and then the lines get blurry and mixed and I'm not saying that that happens to everyone obviously but but it's still a danger that that's inherent in the situation they're thrust together too tightly without sufficient resources and so the responsibility has to be distributed more and like I really do think that it's the sign of the degeneration of the society when that when when single parenthood becomes anything approximating the norm it's not a good idea then the and part of the reason I believe that and I think this has to do with the overwhelming selfishness of modern life is that marriage isn't for the people who are married it's for the children obviously and like if you can't handle that grow the hell up see right now I mean seriously yeah seriously thank you once you once you have kids it is not about you period now that doesn't mean it isn't about you at all but that just seems so self-evident to me I can't believe that anybody would even would even question it oh it's Dino Larson oh yes well I'm certainly aware of that yes it's questioned it's almost illegal to question it now you know to to or illegal to make the set of propositions that I'm making so that's the best I can do guys excellent thank you the question is going in part two the first part of first up here lecture but it's also something that's been on my mind listening to your lectures over the past few months and that's when we talk about the psychological truth or significance of the Bible to what extent does that psychological psychological truth has to be embodied in specific historical events or people and so for instance the thing that sort of been bugging on my mind there's there's a part that st. Paul is talking about in the New Testament somewhere in one of his letters and he's talking to the resurrection and he says if it didn't happen then if this whole thing just means the faith is meaningless like for him there had to be that embodiment of that his capital yes the nor event in that case well the best answer I have to that at the moment is that I'm really happy that I'm not at that point yet in this lecture series you know because because that there's a there's a crucial issue there and I don't know exactly what to make of it and my approach at the moment as I said is to approach this as rationally as I possibly can and I hope I know a hell of a lot more about what I'm doing by the time I get to that particular question and I do have the beginnings of ways to answer that but I'm not going to answer that at all right now because it's so bloody complicated that would just burn me to a frazzle and I'm already mostly bird to a frazzle after that lecture so I couldn't attempt to even start to sketch it out I don't know I mean part of it is to be just rational about it just to be rational about it there is something about the idea that continual death and rebirth is a necessary precondition to proper human adaptation every time you learn something new that's important part of the stupid old you has to die and sometimes that can be an awful lot of you and in fact it can be so much of you sometimes that you just die right you just can't handle it and so there is there is a real idea that you have to identify with the part of yourself that transcends your current personality that can constantly die and be reborn now then I could say well that means that all of this is psychological and symbolic and that's the simplest answer but I'm not satisfied with that answer even though I think it's coherent and complete because the world is a very weird place and there are things about it that we don't understand so so I can't go I can't go any farther than that at the moment so yeah hi dr. Peterson I just recently watched one of your videos of you debating with transgendered protesters at UofT free speech rally in October and one of the protesters one of the comments one of the protesters said to you which isn't particularly very like very chilling was why do you have the right to determine whether an individual is worthy of you using their pronouns the scary thing to me is how common this type of view is among radical left-wing protesters on University campuses who feel they have the right to tell other people what they can think what words they can use and what speakers they can or cannot listen to the even scarier part is that our government is creating legislations to back up their ADL ideologies which is evident through Bill c16 m103 and bill 89 so my question is what do you think the endgame is in all this because it seems every year or we're in the process of finding that out you know and I'm sorry I'm sorry okay we're in the process of finding that out I don't I mean I think the endgame that underlies all of that in my estimation is best summed up by Jacques Derrida's Christiane her criticism of Western civilization its FAL logo centric now we've already talked about what the logos means right and so and and so for for Derrida that was a sign of its utter what would you call it utter despit the dot early despicable dominant nature of Western culture well that that's what animates the post modernists now they may not know that because an indie ology gets fragmented across its adherents and then it only acts as the coherent ideology with all those adherents come together in a mob and then you see the animating spirit so I said I think that there's a battle going on that's a battle exactly at the level that Derrida described and that's a theological battle with a philosophical with it with the philosophical implications and out of those philosophical implications come political implications but it's not primarily political and it's not primarily philosophical it's deeper than that and the post modernists are out there their criticism was designed to be fundamental and it also emerged out of Marxism and let's not forget that the Marxist criticism was not only fundamental but just about resulted in the nuclear annihilation of the girl these are not trivial issues and we're back in the same insane boat and so what do I think should be done about that well I thought about that way before any of this happened and I think that what we should do about it is we should tell the truth because there isn't anything more powerful than that and that's the right theological answer because the spoken truth brings good into being well that's the FAL logo centric idea and I'm trying to revisit that to explain to people what it means and to see if they think that's a good idea I mean that's what we have to figure out is it is that an idea worth adhering to or not the alternative is the c4 the post modernists the world is that landscape of pyramids that I described but there's no transcendent vision that's over above that and all of those pyramids are equally valid and it's a war of everyone against everyone it's like it's like the nightmare of Hobbes Thomas Hobbes except that it's not individuals it's groups and everyone's that group you're a group you're whatever your group is it's like that's death as far as I'm concerned it's it's it's utterly reprehensible and and we better sort it out because if we don't sort it out we are bloody well going to pay for it so thank you hey how's it going I just want to say thank you for doing all this and I really appreciate that's Bob and Doug McKenzie right yeah hey how's it going yeah I'm glad you caught that yeah yeah yeah well I did a Facebook poll yeah people who are familiar with where your work and a question kind of rose to the top like just right out of their lives spectacular and what it was you didn't really touch it here but you touched it a bit in your lectures it was about integrating the shadow yep and one of the main questions was how does one go about that especially in the modern world you know like really sheltered from anything resembling that kind of concept you know we don't engage like the unknown we don't come into life-or-death situations most of us must rework is like an ambulance you know well that's one thing you can do with that is one thing you can do you know well yeah you can search out experiences that put you there that's that's that's you know because well you can do that as a volunteer for example I mean you can one of the things I saw once within Montreal I was in this outdoor mall in Montreal on st. Hubert and saw this great big 17 year old kid you know and he had a mohawk and he was dressed in leather and he with you know studs and like he was he was he was doing the water and Barbarian thing and he had it really down and you know he's standing on the corner with two pink shopping bags hey because look into him and I thought you know if someone offered him the ID the opportunity to drop those goddamn sleeping bags or shopping bags and go fight with Isis he'd be there in a second yeah right because what the hell is some monster like that doing standing on the corner of st. Hubert Alden - pink shopping bags so I mean so some of it is that it you need you need to find out where you can push where you could you can need to find out that edge that you can push yourself against the tree it's going to be different for different people but there's there's that's the call to adventure and heroism and there are life and death situations everywhere around you if you want to involve yourself in them you know an idiot sometimes that might be like to put yourself together to the degree that you can say physically or spiritually or intellectually it could be an intellectual battle it could be a moral battle like the frontier is everywhere the frontier is just the edge between what you know and what you don't know you want to put yourself on that damn edge and then make yourself into something and and you can retreat into comfort in the modern world and I think that is a problem you know I mean I've noticed that it's one of the pathologies of wealth I would say because one of the problems with being relatively wealthy if you're a parent is that you cannot provide your children with necessity and that's a big problem because they need necessity to call them into being and you know if you don't have a lot of material resources and your children ask you for something you can say no because no is the answer it's like no you can't do that but if you can say yes then it's really hard to say no because then you're just arbitrary well I don't know it's like Kierkegaard said you know there will come a time when we have so much security and comfort that what we'll want more than anything else is part deprivation and challenge and I think I think that's particularly what young men want now I think that that's partly because young women they're stuck with that anyways because they have to it's it's it's the necessity of living in the world and the responsibility of infant care in particular like that occupies them men have to do it voluntarily women now - because of the birth control pill but you know that's what thirty years ago we hardly have to talk about that at all yes so then you have so much hi dr. Peterson so I'm actually a Coptic Orthodox and Egyptian so I found you're talking a incredibly interesting I've also taken a deep interest in the old church fathers and as if you're talking about Iraqis I arkin back to st. Athanasius when the idea feels is that you brought up last time that God became man so that man can become like God so I was thinking about the systems of the hierarchies and is that an example of at the top of the pyramid the hierarchy sort of gets inverted or descends to the bottom and brings it up and to the top and that sort of an attraction to of Christianity that sort of made Christianity such a powerful idea what are your thoughts on that oh well it's certainly one of the I mean it's certainly one of the things that we not just Christianity a powerful idea because one of the things that happened this was called the democratization of Osiris if I remember correctly and like what happened see if I can answer this question using this approach for sex is that going to work hmm I don't know if I can answer that question that way the the part of the attraction of Christianity but this was something that emerged across time was the notion that even if you were in a lowly position that there was something about you that was akin to the divine and now you might say well that's just wish fulfillment that's what Freud would say that's what Marx would say right the opiate of the masses tweeted yesterday something I thought was pretty funny which was that like religion was the opiate of the masses but that Marxism was the methamphetamine of the max of the masses so so so I think the attraction was that it it it allowed people to recognize their intrinsic dignity and one of the things I've been thinking about is the juxtaposition between Genesis 1 and Genesis 2 because what I was in Genesis 2 is that human beings collapse and fall right and then were these fallen creatures that no evil but in the beginning in Genesis 1 it's really an optimistic story because it says well we're the sorts of creatures that partake in the calling forth of being from chaos and then that's in our essential nature and to some degree if you juxtapose both of those it's as if that's the entire biblical story rammed together in the first two chapters which is partly why we're taking so long to get through this by the way is that to return to Genesis 1 is the antidote to Genesis 2 it's like to continue to act out the doctrine that you're made in God's image and that means that you're you're capable of speaking good being into existence through truth and that that's also the antidote to the fall which i think is actually the fundamental narrative message of the entire biblical structure and I also think of Western civilization for that matter so there's a nobility and this is also I think Nietzsche was fundamentally wrong in his criticism with Christianity because he thought about it and slaves morality you know the Vengeance of the bottom against the talk that's more historical than theological so it gives dignity it illuminates the dignity of the human being and and requires responsibility so it's not just wish fulfillment it's not Freudian wish fulfillment the Freudian theory which I thought about a lot is not tenable in my estimation it also doesn't account for the existence of hell because if it's only wish fulfillment why bother with hell it means a lot more if you're really going to just fulfill a wish it's like everybody gets to go to heaven no matter what they do you don't have hell which was of course something absolutely terrifying to medieval Christians and then to plenty of people now for that matter so it's the nobility it's the idea of the nobility that I thinks deeply attractive to people and that's all there is I mean what you have to fight against your worm-like fragile mortal existence is the possibility of transcending that with nobility of speech and Act that's what you have and who can hear that without feeling ennoble by that now you might say well you might shudder and say well I don't I can't bear the responsibility it's like well fair enough man you know I mean that that's a reasonable criticism but the consequence of not bearing the responsibility is that's hell really so thank you and thank you very much beautiful um I don't know feel familiar with the words of nasan Talib I'm reasonably familiar with them so I think it's sad to say that he has he talked about the idea that people and especially modern people have a failure to recognize the unknown unknowns yeah such yes right that's a good way of thinking about it can you move the mic up a bit so that people can hear you a little better thanks Gary yes um well I was wondering do you think that that failure might might be in some way related to the way that modern people fail to relate to the idea of God so in the sense that your people can't really grapple with the notion of God I think as much as you can give a rational argument or you can't feel God in the way that perhaps a more religious person or more an older person might have felt God do you think that that inability to recognize the unknown unknowns might play into that yeah well they're okay so that seems to be related to this idea of the absence of necessity that's something like that is that no because I think that I think that what you're you're making a claim maybe tell me if I've got it wrong that if you're sheltered too much then it also it also separates you from anything that's divine I guess that might be right because there's not enough intensity of the experience and something like that is that is that part of the is that part of the issue it might be more related to the idea of like realizing the absolute infinite root of what you don't know like the like the mysterium tremendum that that kind of you know if you believe that through statistical analysis you can get everything under control and you genuinely believe that at some point you'll get it or wonder you know yeah okay well so okay so so well that's also I think part of the danger of rationality that the Catholics have been implicitly warning again forever is that rather rational mind tends to fall in love with its own productions and then to worship them as absolutes which is I think what Melville was trying to represent by his satanic figure in Paradise Lost I think about as like a precursor a prophetic precursor to the emergence of totalitarian states in the modern world and so yeah I think that you can believe that what you know is sufficient to banish permanently what you don't know and I do think that that does paradoxically although you think that that would make you secure it also does destroy your relationship with with with with with the spirit that might help you deal with what it is that you really don't know with the unknown unknowns so yeah I mean we don't know to what degree extreme experience is necessary to bring forth extreme experience right what do you have to be through before you encounter a religious revelation well people might say well you can't because there's no such thing it's like well don't be so sure about that I mean people have reported them to row history but they don't generally occur when your that's my favorite tropen you're eating cheesie's and playing you know and playing Mario Brothers right so yeah so that's the best I can do with that engine yes yeah this has to be the last question all right I'll make it quick yeah earlier when you talked about criminality and creativity trends in that in men peaking at 14 it reminded me of something you said I think it was Joe Rogan talking about sjw's and kind of and how they create their own chaos talking about how adolescents have this drive to change the world and I was wondering if if those three the criminality creativity drive to change the world are linked and if so if they manifest differently in men and women and if they kind of come from the same era well I think they are linked but I'm going to concentrate more on the net second part of your question so I'm going to ask you two guys some think about something so I talked to a friend of mine the other day he's a very very smart guy and we've been talking about while all the sorts of things that we've been talking about tonight for a long time and we were talking about the relatively relative evolutionary roles of men and women this is speculative obviously and and because our research did indicate it's tentative research so far that that the the SGS SJW sort of equality above all else philosophy is more prevalent among women well it's predicted by the personality factors that are more common among women so agreeable this and high negative emotion primarily agreeableness but in addition it's also predicted by being female and that's interesting because in most of the personality research that I've done and as far as I know in the literature at you know in more broadly speaking most of the time you can get rid of the attitudinal differences between men and women or at least reduce them by controlling for personality so if you take a feminine man and a masculine woman then you know that the polls reverse but that didn't seem to be the case with political correctness and so I've been thinking about that a lot because well men are bailing out of the humanities like mad and pretty much out of the universities except for stem the women are moving in like mad and they're also moving into the political sphere like math and this is new right we've never had this happen before and we do know no do not know what the significance of it is it's only 50 years old and so we were thinking about this and so I don't know what you think about this proposition but imagine that that historically speaking it's something like women were responsible for distribution and men were responsible for production something like that and maybe maybe that's only the case really in the tight confines of the immediate family but that doesn't matter because that's most of the evolutionary landscape for human beings anyways what the women does it did was make sure that everybody got enough okay and that seems to me to be one of the things that's driving at least in part the SJW demand for for equity and equality it's like let's make sure everybody has enough it's like both look fair enough you know I mean you can't you can't argue with that but there's there's an antipathy between that and the the reality of differential productivity you know because people really do differ in their productivity so all right so to answer your question fully I do think that the rebellious tendency of adolescence is associated both with that criminality spike especially among men and with creativity yes I think that the SJW phenomena is different and I think it is associated at least in part with the rise of women to political power and and we don't know what women are life when they have political power because they've never had it I mean there's been queens obviously and that sort of thing just being female authority figures and females have wielded far more power historically than feminists generally like to admit but this is a different thing and we don't know what a truly female political philosophy would be like but it might be especially if it's not been well examined and it isn't very sophisticated conceptually it could easily be well let's make sure things are distributed equally well yeah but sorry that's that's just not going to do you fly do you think in terms of the rest of this JW's and you talked about last lecture as well creating chaos when there is none otherwise it'd be static do you think there would be any validity in saying that in a country like Canada were pretty gender equal is there any merit to thinking sjw's are trying to create chaos even when they're arguably is none on the mass level obviously there's still problems why would they do that otherwise it would be static and that well doesn't if it wouldn't for them so I read this I read this quote once and I don't remember who who said it it might have been Robert Heinlein for crying out loud science fiction author that springs to mind but a problem it probably wasn't and his the proposition was that men tested ideas and that women tested men and I kind of like that there's something about that you know and now it obviously it's an over generalization but we also don't know to what degree women test men Cheerilee through provocation it's a lot because like if you want to test someone you don't have a like little conversation with them like you poke the hell out of them and you say okay like I'm going to let go after you and see where your weak spots are and it seems to me that this it seems to me that in this constant protest and use of shame and all of that that goes along with this with this sort of radical movement towards egalitarianism that there's a tremendous amount of provocation and god I'm going to say this too even though I shouldn't but it but we mean how I don't believe this but I'm trying trying to figure it out you know I thought it was absolutely comical when Fifty Shades of Grey came out a not just I just thought that was just so insanely comical that at the same time there's this massive political demand for like radical equality and and and say with regards to sexual behavior and the fastest-selling novel the world had ever seen was S&amp;M; domination right it's like oh well we know where the unconscious is going with that one don't leave and and sometimes I think like because one of the things that I've really tried to puzzle out and it's not like I believe this right I'm just telling you what I wear the edges of my thinking of being going is that you have this crazy alliance between the feminists and the radical Islamist that I just do not get it's like the feminists it's like why they aren't protesting non-stop about Saudi Arabia is just completely beyond me like I do not understand it in the least and I wonder - I just wonder bloody well is this is the Freudian means that is there an attraction you know the is there an attraction that's emerging among the female radicals for that totalitarian male dominance that they've chased out of the West and I mean that's a hell of a thing to think but I after all I am psychoanalytically minded and I do think things like that because like I just can see no rational reason for it the only other rational reason is that well the West needs to fall and so the enemy of my enemy is our yeah it's a guy exactly now what is it I thought that wrong with the enemy of enemy is my friends yes exactly so elements tend to vote liberal as well yes well so that that could be the case but I am NOT going to shake my suspicions about this unconscious balancing because as the demand for egalitarianism and the eradication of masculinity accelerates there's going to be a longing in the unconscious for the precise opposite for the problem of that right the more you want you scream for equality the more your unconscious is going to admire dominance and so well that's that's that's well that's how you think if your cycle analytically minded and you know I'm a great admirer of Freud he knew a hell of a lot more than people like to think and and so which is partly why everyone still hates him even though it's late a hundred years since he's you know really really being around so all right we should stop hello everyone so hopefully we're going to get past Genesis 1 today that's the theory so I finished my new book yesterday yes that's that's taken about three years of writing it's quite a long time to write something so yeah I'm it's done except for the mopping up you know copy editing and that sort of thing so hopefully it's as good as I can make it I don't know that's any good but it's as good as I can make it anyways alright so this is the stories that I'm going to tell you tonight I've been thinking about well like the ones last week for that matter for a very long period of time but I think these even longer and one of the things that I just do not understand I cannot fathom this I cannot understand how there can be so much information in such tiny little stories especially the story of Cain and Abel that story just every time I read it it just flattens me because it it's only like a paragraph long there's just nothing to it you know and I think about it I think about it and I think about it I think about it every time I think about it another layer comes out from underneath and then another layer comes out from underneath it and I can't figure that out like you know the rational approach that I've been describing to you is predicated on the idea that these stories have somehow encapsulated wisdom that we generated interpersonally and behaviorally in that an image over very vast stretches of time and then condensed it into very very dense articulated words that are then further refined by the act of being remembered and transmitted and remembered and transmitted and remembered and transmitted over vast stretches of time and that's a pretty good argument I'm willing to I'm willing to go with it but it still never ceases to amaze me how much information such tiny little passages can can contain so we'll take that apart today and I think it's especially true with the story of Cain and Abel because it works on the individual level and it works on the familial level and it works on the political level and it works at the level of warfare and it works at the level of economics and it's that's a lot for a little tiny one paragraph story to cover man now you know you could object well with these stories you never know what you're reading into it and what's in the story right that's part of let's call it the postmodern dilemma and fair enough and there's really no answer to that any more than there is an answer to how do you know your interpretation of the world is well let's not say correct but sufficient there's some answer to that it's sufficient in if you can act it out in the world and other people don't object too much and you don't die and nature doesn't take a bite out of you any more often than necessary you know those are the constraints within which we live so it you have some way of determining whether your interpretation is at least functionally successful and that's and that's not trivial and I guess you can say the same thing to the interpretations that might be laid out on these stories and at the moment that's probably good enough hopefully you find the interpretations functionally significant at multiple levels and I also think the chance of managing that by chance is very very small you know to be able to pull off an interpretation of the story that works at multiple levels simultaneously you think with each level that it applies the chances that you've stumbled across something by chance have to be decreasing right there's a technical term for that in psychology it's called something like multi method multi trait method of determining whether or not something is accurate and the idea is the more ways that you can measure it and get the same result the more confident you can be that you're not just deluding yourself with your a priori hypothesis you know that there's actually something out there so I guess that's another part of this method is that and it's also a method that I use in my in my speaking I think I don't try to tell people anything that isn't personally relevant you know because you should know why you are being taught something right you should know what the fact is good for and it should be good for you personally at least in some sense and then if you act it out in the world it should be good for your family and maybe should have some significance for the broader community and I think that's what meaning means and I don't really see the utility in being taught things that aren't meaningful facts that aren't meaningful because there's an infinite number of fact and there's no way you're going to remember all of them they have to be they have to have the aspect of tools essentially something like that because we are tool using creatures well these these stories have that aspect is as far as I can tell there's nothing there's no doubt about that so here's the stories in Genesis two very famous stories obviously virtually everybody who's even vaguely versed in Western roughly speaking Western Western culture knows these stories and that's something that's interesting too that stories can be so foundational that everybody shares them I mean you can say the same thing about a fairly large handful of fairy tales as well or you could at least until recently but the fact that stories are foundational I think also means that they have to be given out kind of well even if you don't give them any respect you have to at least treat them as remarkable curiosities so why those stories and why did they stick around and why does everybody know them and it's not self-evident by any stretch of the imagination and you can use explanations can use the Freudian explanation Freud sort of thought that the judeo-christian was predicated on the idea that the figure of the Father the familial father was expanded up into cosmic dimensions so that mankind existed in the same relationship to the cosmic father let's say that an infant or a small child existed in relationship to his or her own father and that's a reasonable critique I would say to some degree but it does and this was purposeful it does imply more than implied for its case that people who adopt religious belief that has a personified figure as at its apex are essentially acting out the role of dependent children and you know I thought about that critique for a long time and believe me that's been a powerful critique one of the best books I've ever read called the denial of death by Ernest Becker I think took that line of argumentation it developed it as well as any any book I've ever seen argue it Necker tried to bring closure to Freudian psychoanalysis on religion he did a pretty wicked job of it like I think the book is seriously flawed and wrong but it's really a great book like some books are well some books are wrong in really good ways right they make a powerful powerful argument they really take it to its extreme I think Becker missed the point and he missed it in the same way that Freud missed Jung's point and Becker who wrote this book on the psychology the psychoanalysis of religion never referred to Jung except very briefly in the introduction and I think that was a major mistake but Becker took the argument that the hypothesis of God is nothing but an attempt by human beings to recreate quasi infantile state of dependency and to be able to rely on an all-knowing father and to thereby recover the comfort perhaps that we experienced when we were young and had a hypothetically all-knowing father for those of us who are lucky to have someone who rig vaguely resembled that but the more I thought about that the more that struck me is quite implausible across time Charles Taylor I think it was Charles Taylor wrote an interesting book called the I think it was called the origins of the modern self he's a McGill philosopher and I wouldn't necessarily call him a friend of classic religion but it doesn't matter he made a very interesting point about Christianity in particular he said if you're going to invent a religion that offered you nothing but infantile comfort why in the world would you bother with conceptualizing hell that just seems like an unnecessary detail to add to the whole story right if it's it's all about comfort why would you hypothesize that the consequence of of a serious error was eternal torment that doesn't really sound very isn't the sort of thing that that is likely to make you feel comfortable James Joyce when he wrote about that said he had terrible nightmares when he was a child because of the Hellfire sermons that Jesuits used to spout spew forth let's say and he wrote down what he remembered of them and they were pretty hair-raising I think in James Joyce's book I think it was portrait of the artist of a young man man he talked about the Jesuits telling them and telling him that hell was a like a prison with walls that were seven miles thick that was always in darkness and consumed by fire and that the people who were trapped there were continually burnt by this dark fire that gave new light which also simultaneously rejuvenated their flesh so that it could be burnt off eternally in case you were wondering how it was going to be burnt off eternally that's apparently the process it's not easy for me to see that as an infantile wish-fulfillment I'm afraid you know you could well you could be a cynic about it and Elaine Tasos who wrote a book on the devil was cynical about it in this manner she thought that the Christians so to speak invented hell as a place to put their enemies and you know yeah fair enough but no that's not accurate really well although it's convenient to have a place to put your enemies Charles Taylor did point out for example that the modern terror of loss of self let's say the existential loss of self and loss of meaning was perhaps roughly paralleled by the medieval terror of Hell you know in terms of the existential intensity and so it wasn't hell wasn't merely a place where those people that you didn't care for would end up it was the place where you were going to go if you didn't walk the line properly and so I don't think Freud's Freud's critique really holds water in the final analysis and then Marx's critique of course was that religion was the opiate of the masses and he made an argument that was similar to Freud's although somewhat earlier and made the based upon the presupposition that religious beliefs were stories told to the gullible masses in order to keep them pacified and happy well their corporate overlords for lack of a better purpose continue to exploit them and and and weaken them and you know I find that I find the critique of human institutions as driven entirely by power very let's say questionable to to say the least and of course every human institution is corrupted by corrupted is corrupt by for one reason or another and it's also corrupt specifically by such things as deception and arrogance and the demand for unearned power and the same thing of course can be applied to religious systems but that doesn't mean that they are in some special way characteristic of those faults and maybe you think they are and you know maybe you can make a case for but it's not prime FS I think that's how you say that evident that that is that also is a particularly useful criticism I don't buy it I think there's I think that's far too cynical I think that the people who wrote these stories first of all what are you going to do you can oh really you're going to run a bloody conspiracy for three thousand years successfully it's like good luck with that can't run a conspiracy for fifteen minutes without somebody ratting you out you know it's it's impossible so whatever is that the basis of the construction not only of these stories but of the dogmatic structures that emerged from them I think that it's a terrible mistake to reduce them to unit dimensional explanations in fact I generally think that reducing any complex human behavior to uni dimensional explanation is often the sign of a seriously limited thinker you know I say that with some caution because Freud did do that with religion at least to some degree and Freud was a serious thinker and Marx I suppose was a serious thinker - even though well yeah is he someone you just if you have any sense marks just leaves you speechless so so anyway so that's all to say that I don't think there's any simple explanation for how these stories have the power that they have I really don't I don't think you can reduce it to political conspiracy that's for sure I don't think you could reduce it to psychological infantilism I think you can make a case like I have that they are repositories of the collective wisdom of the human race I had an interesting letter this week from someone I get a lot of interesting letters I think I'm going to make an archive out of them and put them on the web at some point with people's permission obviously and he said that he'd been following my lectures and noted that I had been making what you might describe as a quasi biological or evolutionary case for for the emergence of the information that the stories contained and he said well how do you know that someone from a different religious tradition or speaking of a different religious tradition couldn't do exactly the same thing and I thought well first of all to some degree they could because there is overlap like I've talked to you a little bit about Taoist for example in the Taoist view of being as you know the eternal balance between chaos and order one thing I didn't tell you I don't think about that I don't know if you know this but there's a neuropsychologist named L Conan Goldberg who is a student of Alexander Luria and Luria was I think the greatest neuropsychologist of the 20th century he was a Russian and he was one of the first people to really determine in large part the function of the frontal cortex which was quite a mystery for a very long period of time and Goldberg you know you know how we have two hemispheres right they have a left hemisphere and the right hemisphere and people often think of the left for right-handed people right-handed males more particularly because women are more neurologically diffuse it's one of the things that makes them more robust to head injury for example and maybe men are less diffuse and somewhat more specialized which makes them a bit more specialized but a little more subject to damage anyways we have to him is left in the right and no one exactly knows why and we know that the house quasi-independent consciousness is because if you divide the corpus callosum that that unites them which was done to in cases of intractable epilepsy for example that each hemisphere is capable of developing its own consciousness to some degree the right generally nonverbal and the left verbal and so there has been this idea that the left is a verbal Hemisphere and the right is a nonverbal hemisphere but that can't be right because of course animals don't talk and they have a bifurcated hemisphere so if it's right it's not causally right now goldberg hypothesized instead that the hemispheres were were specialized for routinization and non routinization or for novelty and familiarity or for chaos and order and so that's pretty damn cool when i ran across that i also thought about that as a as a signal of what would you call it multi method multi trait construct validation because i'd never thought of the hemispheres as operating that way and goldberg came up with this in a historical pathway that was entirely independent from any mythologically inspired thinking completely independent fact it was motivated more by materialist russian neuro psychology which was materialist for political reasons and also for scientific reasons but the idea is that we have one hemisphere that reacts very rapidly to things we don't know and it's more imaginative and diffuse in it and it's associated more with negative emotion because negative emotion is what you should feel immediately when you encounter something you don't understand because it's a form of thinking right negative emotion it's like I'm somewhere where things aren't with what they should be right hemisphere does that generates images very rapidly to help you figure out what might be there and then the left hemisphere takes that and develops it into something that's more articulated and and algorithmic and fully understood and so then there's this dynamic balance between the right and the left hemisphere where the left tries to impose order on the world that's Ramachandran who's a neurologist in in california very famous neuro neuro neurologist who also developed a theory like goldberg who said that the left hemisphere or imposes routinized order on the world and the right hemisphere generates novelty and and and reacts the novelty and generates novel hypotheses and he thought and there is some good evidence for this that's what's happening during the dream is that information is moved from the right hemisphere to the left hemisphere in small doses basically so that the novel revelations of the right hemisphere don't demolish the algorithmic structures that the left hemisphere has so carefully put together so and I like that theory too because it also does help justify the hypothesis that I'd be laying out for you which is that you know there's part of us that extends ourselves out into the world in tries to understand what we don't know and that that part extends itself out with behavior and also with emotion and also with image and then maybe with poetry and then maybe with storytelling and then as that develops then we develop more and more articulated representations of that emergent knowledge and so you can map that quite nicely onto the neurologists and the neuropsychologist presumption about what constitutes the reason for the hemispheric differentiation but the other thing that's so cool about the hemispheric differentiation argument as far as I'm concerned and this is really this is worth thinking about man because it's a real it's a real is a word that Ned Ned Flanders uses for that noggin scratcher I think it's something like that anyways you know we do make the assumption that what it is that we are biologically adapted to is reality right it's actually an axiomatic definition if you're a Darwinian because nature is what selects by definition that's what nature is its what selects and if the nature that selects has forced upon you a dual hemispheric structure because half of you has to deal with the chaos and have to have a view has to deal with order then you can make a pretty damn strong inferential case that the world is made out of chaos and order and that's really something to that's really something to think about man you know so you can think about that for a while if you want so anyways for whatever reason there is a lot to packed into these stories and so let's investigate a couple more of them we'll start with this story but of Adam and Eve now you may remember that the Bible is a series of books Bible actually means something akin to library and these books were written by all sorts of different people and groups of people and groups of editors and groups of people who edited over and over across very very large periods of time so they're altered by no one and many at the same time if there was a tradition for a long time that the earliest books were written by Moses but that that's probably not technically correct even though it might be dramatically correct let's say or correct in the way that a fairy tale is correct and I'm not trying to put down fairy tales by saying that but there's a number of authors and the way the authors have been identified tentatively is by certain stylistic commonalities across the different stories different uses of words like the words for God different poetic styles different topics and so forth and people have been working for probably 200 years roughly that to try to sort out who wrote what and how that was all cobbled together but it doesn't really matter for our purposes what matters is that it's an aggregation of collected narrative traditions and maybe you could say it's an aggregation of collective narrative wisdom we don't have to go that far but we can at least say it's aggregated narrative traditions and that there was some reason that those traditions and not others were kept and that there was some reasons complex though they may have been why they were sequenced in the order that they were sequenced because one of the things that's really remarkable about the Bible as an as a document is that it actually has a plot and that's really something I mean it's it's sprawling and it goes many places but the fact that something's being cobbled together over several thousand years maybe four thousand years maybe longer than that if you include the oral traditions that preceded it and God knows how old those are but that collective imagination part of the human collective imagination has cobbled together a library with a plot and like I see the Bible as an attempt a collective attempt by him you solve the deepest problems that we have and I think those problems are the problems of primarily that the problem of self-consciousness the fact that not only do we are immortal and that we die but that we know it and that's the unique that's the unique predicament of human beings and it makes all the difference and I think that's laid out in Adam and Eve in the story of Adam and Eve I think the reason that that makes us unique and is laid out in that story and interestingly and I really realized this only after I was doing last three lectures so the Bible presents a cataclysm of okay a Cataclysm at the beginning of the top of time which is the emergence of self-consciousness and human beings which puts a risk into the structure of being that's the right way to think about it and that's really given cosmic significance now you can dispense with out and say well nothing that happens to human beings that have caused me significance because we're these short-lived you know mold like entities that are like cancers on this tiny little planet that's rotating out in the middle of nowhere on the edge of some unknown galaxy in the middle of infinite space and nothing that happens to us matters and it's fine you like you can walk down that road if you want I wouldn't recommend it I mean and that's part of the reason I think that for all intents and purposes it's untrue you know it isn't there it isn't a road you can walk down and live well in fact I think if you really walk down that road and you really take it seriously you end up not living at all so it's certainly very reminiscent I mean I've talked to lots of people who are suicidal and seriously suicidal and you know the kind of conclusions that they draw both the utility of life prior to wishing for its cessation are very much like the kind of conclusions that you draw if you walk down that particular line of reasoning long enough if you're interested in that you could read Tolstoy his confessions Leo Tolstoy his confession it's a very short book it's a it's a killer man it's it's a powerful book very very short and Tolstoy describes his obsession with suicide when he was at the height of his fame most well-known author in the world you know huge family international fame wealth beyond anyone's imagining at that time influential admired everything that you could possibly imagine that everyone could have and for years he was afraid to go out into his barn with a rope or a gun because he thought he'd either hang himself or shoot himself and he did get out of that he and he describes why that happened and where he went when that happened so if you're interested in that that's a very good book but so the biblical stories and starting with Adam and Eve they present a different story they present the emergence of self-consciousness in human beings as cosmically cataclysmic event and you could say well what do we have to do with the cosmos and the answer to that is it depends on what you think consciousness has to do with the cosmos and perhaps that's nothing and perhaps it's everything I'm going to go with everything because that's how it looks to me now of course anyone who wishes to is welcome to disagree but if you believe that consciousness is a force of cosmic significance which Britt which which being itself is dependent on in any real sense at least in any experience will sense that it's that it's not unreasonable to assume that radical restructurings of consciousness can worthily be granted some kind of cosmic or metaphysical significance and even if it's not true from outside the human perspective whatever that might be it's bloody well true from within the human perspective that's for sure and so that's the that's the initial event in some sense after the creation is the cataclysmic fall and then the entire rest of the Bible is an attempt to figure out what the hell to do about that and everything in it is is and so you could say for example in the earliest in the Old Testament stories what seems to happen is that the State of Israel is is founded and it rises and falls and rises and falls and so there's this experimentation for centuries millennia even with the idea that the way that you protect yourself against the tragic consequences of self consciousness is by organizing yourself into a state but then what happens is the state itself begins to reveal its pathologies and as those pathologies mount the state becomes an unstable and collapses and then it rises back up and becomes unstable and collapses and then it rises back up after it does this a number of this is primarily from Northrup prize interpretations people start wondering if there's not something wrong with the idea that the state itself is this is the is the pathway is the place of redemption that there's something wrong with that idea and so then I think on on the heels of that comes the Christian revolution with its hypothesis that it's not the state that's that's the place of salvation it's the individual psyche and then there's there's a there's a an ethic that goes along with that too which is quite interesting so the ethic of redemption after the state experiment fails let's say is that it's it's the it's within the individual that redemption can be manifested let's say and even in so far as the state is concerned because the state's proper functioning is dependent on the proper functioning of the individual rather than the reverse most fundamentally and that the proper mode of individual being that's redemptive is truth and truth is the antidote to the suffering that's it emerges with the fall of man in the story of Adam and Eve and then that relates back to the chapters that we've already talked about because there's this insistence in Genesis 1 that it's the word in the form of truth that generates order out of chaos but even more importantly and this is something like I said I most clearly realize just doing these lectures for the last three weeks is God continues to say as he speaks order into being with truth that the being he speaks into being is good and so there's this insistence that the being that spoke into being through truth is good and so there's a hint there so interesting is a hint there right at the beginning of the story that the the state of being that Adam and Eve inhabited before they fell before they became self consciousness conscious insofar as they were made in the image of God and acting out the truth that that being itself was properly balanced and it takes the entire Bible to rediscover that which is a which is a journey back to the beginning right and that's a classic see it's a classic mythological theme that the wise person is the person who finds what they lost in childhood and regains it right so that's a I think that's a Jewish idea that Zadok if I remember correctly who is a messiah figure is the person who finds what he lost in childhood and regains it his idea of this return to the beginning except that the return is you don't fall backwards into childhood and unconsciousness you returned voluntarily to the state of childhood well awake and then determined to participate through truth in the manifestation of proper being now you know I'm a psychologist and I've taught personality theory for a very long time and I know personality theory is that profound personality theories pretty well and I'm reasonably well versed in philosophy although not as well-versed as I should be but I can tell you in all the things I've ever read or encountered or thought about I have never once found an idea that matches that in terms of profundity but not only profundity also in believability because the other thing I see is a clinician and I think this is very characteristic of clinical experience and also very much described explicitly by the great clinicians is that what cures in therapy is truth that's the curative now there's exposure to the things you're afraid of and avoiding as well but I would say that's a form of enacted truth because if you know there's something you should do by your own set of rules and you're avoiding it then you're enacting a lot you know you're not telling one but you're acting one out it's the same damn thing so if I can get you to face what it is that you're confronting that you know you shouldn't be avoiding then what's happening is that we're both partaking in the process of attempting you to act out your deepest truth and what happens is that that improves people's lives and it improves them radically and the evidence the clinical evidence to that is overwhelming we know that if you expose people to the things they're afraid of but that they're avoiding they get better and you have to do it carefully and cautiously and with their own participation and all of that but of all the things that clinicians have established that's credible that's number one and that's nested inside this deeper realization that the clinical experience is redemptive let's say because it's designed to address insofar as the people who are engaged in the process are both telling each other the truth and then you think well obviously because if if you have some problems and you come to talk to me about them well first of all just by coming to talk to me about them you've admitted that they exist man that's a pretty good start and second well if you tell me about them then we know what they are and then if we know what they are we can maybe start to lay out some solutions and then you can go act out the solutions and see if they work but if you don't admit they're there and you won't tell me what they are and I don't and I'm like posturing and acting egotistically and taking the upper hand and all of that in our discussions well how the hell is that going to work you know it might be comfortable moment to moment while we stay encapsulated in our delusion but it's not going to work so a lot of that seems to think it through it seems pretty self-evident and you know Freud thought that repression was at the heart of much mental suffering the difference between repression and deception is a matter of degree and that's all its technical it's a technical differentiation and Alfred Adler who was one of Freud's greatest associates would say and much underappreciated I would say he thought that people got into problems because they started to act out a life lie that's what he called it a life lie that's worth looking up because I blur although not as charismatic as Freud was very practical and and and really foreshadowed a lot of later developments in cybernetics theory and of course Jung believed that you could bypass psychotherapy entirely by merely making a proper moral effort in your own life and Carl Rogers believed that it was honest communication mediated through dialogue that had redemptive consequences and the behaviors believe that you do a careful micro analysis of the problems that are laid before you and help introduce people to what they're avoiding it's like all of those things to me are just secular variations of the notion that truth will set you free essentially so so you know it's a pretty powerful story and a it's not that easy to dispense with and B the other thing is you dispense with it at your peril because what I have seen as well is that the people that I've seen who've been really hurt have been hurt mostly by deceit and that's all so we're thinking about that you know you get walloped by life there's no doubt about that absolutely no doubt about that but I thought for a long time that maybe maybe maybe people can hang handle earthquakes and cancer and even Gasparini but they can't handle betrayal and they can't handle deception they can't handle having the rug pulled out from underneath and by people that they love and trust that just does them in you know it it makes the meal but it does where it hurts that you know psycho physiologically it damages them but more than that it makes them cynical and bitter and vicious and resentful and then they also start to act all that out in the world and that makes it worse so so you know the story starts God uses the spoken truth to create being that is good and then the Cataclysm occurs and then human beings spend until millenia trying to sort out exactly what to do about the fact that they've become self conscious and you know by the way we have right we are in fact self conscious no other animal has that distinction now you'll read that chimpanzees can for example if you put lipstick on a chimpanzee it's kind of a strange thing to do yeah well I won't pursue that any further but but the chimp a chimpanzee will wipe off the lipstick if you show it a mirror and dolphins seem to be able to recognize themselves in mirrors and there is so there is the glimmerings of self conscious recognition in other animals but to put that in the same conceptual category as human self-consciousness is into my way of thinking it's it's well it's uninformed to say the least but I also think that it's motivated it's motivated by a kind of anti humanistic underlying and underlying motivation because our self-consciousness is so incredibly developed compared to that that they're hardly in the same conceptual universes it's like comparing the the alarm cries of vervet monkeys when they see a predator to the language of human beings it's like yeah yeah there's some similarities man there are utter insanity nning but they're not language and the self-consciousness of animals is proto self-consciousness and it's only they're a very small number of animals and it's it's nothing like ours they're not aware of the future like we are they're not aware of their boundaries in space and time and that's the critical thing and most particularly time human beings discovered time and when we discovered time we discovered the end of each of our being and that made all the difference and that's what the story of Adam and Eve is about so Genesis one is derived from the priestly source where God is known as Elohim or L shall die and there's God in the singular and there's God's in the plural and I suppose that's because it seems that if you analyze the history of the development of monotheistic ideas that monotheism emerges out of a plurality of gods and as I mentioned I think it's because the gods represent fundamental forces at minimum and those fundamental forces have to be hierarchically organized for with some with something absolute at the top because otherwise they do nothing but war like you have to organize your values hierarchically or you stay confused and that's true if you're an individual and it's true of your estate if you don't know what the next thing you should do is then there's 50 things you should do and then how are you going to do any of them you can't you have to prioritize something has to be above something else has to be arranged in a hierarchy for it not to be chaotic and so there's some principle at the top of the hierarchy and maybe the organization of the gods over time that's the battle of gods that machiya le ADA talked about and if you're interested in that you could read a history of religious ideas which I would really recommend it's a three-volume book it's actually quite as straightforward read as far as these things go and elliot it does a very nice job of describing how and even why polytheism tends towards monotheism even in polytheistic cultures there's a strong tendency for the gods to organize themselves in the hierarchy with one God at the top in a monotheistic culture in some in some sense all the other gods just disappear across time and there's nothing left at the top God but even in a polytheistic society there's a hierarchy of power among the gods the first story is newer than the second one so the story I'm going to tell you today is actually older than the one I already told you even though their order was flipped by the redactor who's the hypothetical person or persons who edited these stories together we don't know exactly why he or the committee or what I suspect it was a single person but who knows we don't know why the stories were edited together in the order that they were added together but we could infer I mean they were edited together in that order because the editor thought they made sense that way because that's what an editor does right an editor tends to take diverse ideas and then to organize them in some manner that makes sense and part of the manner that makes sense is that you can tell them to people and the people stay interested and you can tell them to people and people remember them that's that's one of the ways you can tell if you've got an argument right because it's communicable and understandable and memorable and so he this person was let's say motivated by intuition to organize the stories in this particular manner so the second the yahwist strand contains the stories the classic stories in the Pentateuch that's five books Genesis Exodus Leviticus numbers and Deuteronomy which we'll try to get through perhaps in these twelve lectures we'll see we'll see how that goes it's strongly on through perfect so the God in the August account is for all intents and purposes a sort of meta person and I dealt with that a little bit last week because people tend to you know think of that as unsophisticated but when you think that the mind that the the ground of consciousness is the most complex thing that we know of then it's not so unsophisticated to assume that the most complex thing that there might be is like that or it's at least it's as good as we can do with our imaginations and so I don't think it's so it's so it's so unsophisticated it's also the case and this is practically speaking is that it is not at all unreasonable to think of God the Father as the spirit that arises from the crowd that exists into the future right and that's we talked about that in relationship to the idea of sacrifice at least a little bit more or we're going to you make sacrifices in the present so that the future is happy with you the question is what is that future that would be happy with you and the answer to that is it's the spirit of humanity that's that's who you're negotiating with because you make the assumption that if you forego impulsive pleasure and get your medical degree that when you're done in 10 years and you're a physician humanity as such will honor your sacrifice and commitment and open the doors to you right so you're treating the future as if it's a single being and you're also treating it as if it's a something like a compassionate judge you're acting that out and maybe we had to imagine God in that form before we could understand once we started to understand that there was a future perhaps we had to imagine God in that form in order to concretize something that we could bargain with so that we could figure out how to use sacrifice to figure out how to guide ourselves into the future because that sacrifice is a contract with the future but it's not a contract with any particular person it's it's a contract with the spirit of humanity as such it's something like that and so when you think about it that way that should make you faint with amazement because that is such a bloody amazing idea to come up with that idea that you can bargain with the future that is some idea man that's that's like the major idea of human of humankind we suffer what do we do about it we figure out how to bargain with the future and we minimize suffering in that manner it's like no other animal does that either you know like the Lions they just eat everything I think a wolf can eat 40 pounds of meat in a single sitting right it's like there's a meat eat it it's light not like save some mammoths for tomorrow that's a that's that's not a wolf thing man that's a human thing and that might mean you have to be hungry today or maybe you're a farmer you know several thousand years ago six thousand years ago or so what agriculture first got going and you're starving to death waiting for the spring planting and you think we bill it bloody well better not eat those seeds right and that's really something to be able to control yourself to make the future real to put off what you could use today and not just in some impulsive manner man maybe your kids are starving to death you think we are not touching the seeds that we need to the future and for human beings to have discovered that and then to also have figured out that we could bargain with the future it's like man that's something and I think that that I think that the stories that are laid out in this book actually describe at least in part the process by which that occurred the always stories begin with Genesis 2:4 this is the account of the heavens and the earth wind so there's two real creation stories at the beginning the newer one which is the first one and the older one which is the second one and the older one begins in Chapter two and that's the story that we're going to that we are getting into now Adam and Eve are in that can enable know what the Tower of Babel in the yahwist strand Exodus numbers along and there's some of the priestly version in there too as well as the Ten Commandments well there are some lovely representations of a paradise this is a Garden Earthly Delights what's his name say the boss yes I wrote it was boss he has a crazy I mean if you how he didn't get burnt at the stake is absolutely beyond me I mean you know some of you know about salvador deli i suppose most of you do I mean delis a piker compared to Hieronymous Bosch man you could spend because there's three pieces of this particular painting you could spend a very bizarre and surreal looking at that painting I don't know what it was with Bosch but he was some sort of creature that only popped up once and probably for the best and so there's been very many representations of paradise I mean god only knows what that is it's like I could probably guess but I won't and then look I mean that's that's that's the lion lying down with the lamb right so that's this idea that's maybe projected back in time that there was a time or maybe will be a time when when that the horrors of life are no longer necessary for life itself to exist right and the horrors of life are of course that everything eats everything else and that everything dies and that everything's born and that the whole bloody place is at charnel-house and it's it's a catastrophe from beginning to end and this is this is the vision of it being other than that and you know there's a strong idea this is also in implicit in the alchemical ideas and I think it's also implicit in the Scientific Revolution that human beings can interact with reality in such a way so that the tragic and evil elements of it can be mitigated and so that we can move somewhat closer to a state that might be characterized Oh that's obviously imagistic but it might be characterized by something like that where we have the benefits of actual existence without all of the catastrophe that seems to go along with it and Carl Jung when he wrote about the emergence of alchemy or the emergence of science from alchemy he thought of science as being motivated by a dream because for Jung dream was the dream was the manifestation of the instincts it was the boundary between the instincts and thinking said well science is nested inside a dream and the dream is that if we investigated the structures of material reality with sufficient attention and truth that we could then learn enough about material reality to alleviate suffering right to produce the Philosopher's Stone to make everybody wealthy to make everybody healthy to make everyone live as long as they wanted to live or perhaps forever that's the goal to alleviate the catastrophe of existence and that that idea the idea that mysteries the solution to the mysteries of life that might enable us to develop such a substance or let's say a multitude of substances provided the motive for for the development of science and you'll trace that the development of that mode of force really over a thousand years and if you were interested in reading his books on alchemy which are extraordinarily difficult and that's really saying something about young because all of his books are difficult and then the books on alchemy they kind of take a quantum leap that's actually very small leap so I shouldn't say that they take a massive leap into a whole different dimension of complexity but that's what he was trying to get at he went back into the alchemical texts and interpreted them as if they were the dream on which science was founded Newton was an alchemist by the way I mean you know goddesses are certainly well supported by the historical fact science did emerge out of alchemy the question is what were the alchemists up to and they were trying to produce the Philosopher's Stone and that was the universal medical meant for mankind's pathology Jung felt that what had happened was that you know Christianity had promised that the cessation of suffering promised it for a thousand years and yet suffering went on unabated and at the same time Christianity had attempted to really put emphasis on spiritual development let's say at the expense of material development right thinking of material development as something akin to a sin trying to get a control of impulsivity and all the things that went along with a to embodied existence there was a reason for it but that by about a thousand AD the European mind somewhat educated by that point somewhat able to concentrate on a single point perhaps because of a very long history of intense religious training turned its dream to the unexplored material world and thought well you know the spiritual Redemption that we've been seeking didn't appear to produce the result that was promised or intended and so maybe there's another place that we should look and that was in the damned material world right which which which was supposed to be at least according to some elements of classic thinking nothing but the creation of the devil so but the point I'm making is that you know it's very difficult to underestimate the amount of human motivation that's embedded in the attempt to alleviate suffering to eradicate disease to help people live a healthy a healthy life and that's the disease obviously but to live a long life as well and make things as peaceful as possible I mean you can be cynical about people and you can talk about them as motivated by power and being corrupt in all of those things and all of those things are true but you shouldn't throw away the baby with the bathwater because we have been striving for a very long time to set things right and we've done actually not too bad a job of it for half starving crazy insect ridden chimpanzees with life spans of 50 to 70 years so you know we could deserve a bit of sympathy for our position as far as I'm concerned so some other representations this one I like the one on the left that's paradise has a walled garden and that's what paradise means it's paradise I which is I don't remember the language it's it's it's a it's a it's associated with Persian paradise that means walled garden and why a walled garden well it goes back to the chaos order idea so this is where God puts man and woman after the creation in a walled garden well the wall is culture and order and the garden is nature and the idea is the proper human habitat is nature and culture imbalance as well we like Gardens well why because well they're not completely covered with weeds and mosquitoes and black flies right so they're civilized a little bit but still within that civilization nature in its more benevolent guys is encouraged to flourish and people find that rejuvenating and so the idea that paradise the proper habitat of a human being is a walled garden is a good one and it's walled because well you want to keep things out right I mean raccoons for example if you want to keep those things out man even though it's impossible and you know you don't you don't want well there's all sorts of things you don't want your garden like snakes walls don't seem to be much use against them but the idea that paradise is a walled garden is is a an echo back to the chaos order idea walls culture right garden nature so the proper human habitat is a properly tended garden now the radical left-leaning anti-theist environmentalists tend to make the case that the predations of the Western capitalist system are consequence of the injunction that was delivered in Genesis by God to man to go out and dominate the earth David Suzuki has talked a lot about this by the way they believe that that statement has given rise to our inappropriate assumption that we have the right to exert control over the world and that that's what's turned us into these terrible predatory monsters sometimes described as cancers on the face of the earth or viruses that have inhabited the entire ecosystem who are doing nothing but what wandering everywhere and wreaking havoc as rapidly as we possibly can which is another perspective on the essential element of humankind that I find absolutely deplorable I mean if you look at the historical record for example even casually you'll find out that as early as as late as the late 1800s 1895 thereabouts Thomas Huxley who was Aldous Huxley's grandfather and a great defender of Darwin prepared a report for the British government on oceans sustainability and his conclusion was fish away guys man there's so many fish out there the oceans are so inexhaustible that no matter how hard humanity tried for for any number of years the probability that we could do more than put a dent in what was out there was a zero now Huxley turned out to be wrong he didn't realize that our population was going to spike so dramatically partly because we got a little bit rich and our children stopped dying at the rate of like 60 percent before they were one years old and you know we actually managed to populate the earth with a few people but it wasn't really until 1960 or so that we woke up to the fact that there were so many of us that we actually had to start paying attention to what we were doing to the planet and that's like what 50 years ago well we've just started to develop the technology or the wherewithal to understand that the whole world might be well considered a garden and we need to live inside the proper balance between culture and order or culture and and and chaos before that we were spending all of our time just trying not to die and usually very unsuccessfully so so I don't agree with that interpretation of the opening sections of Genesis I don't believe that it's given human being the right to act as super predators on the planet I think that instead the proper environment for human beings is presented quite properly as a garden and that the role of people and that's explicitly stated in in the second story in Adam and Eve was to tend the garden and that means to make the proper decisions and to make the sure that everything thrives in flourishes and and so that it's good for the things that are living there that aren't just people but also good for the people too so fine I think we can we could at least note that that's a slightly different take on the story than the ultimately cynical interpretation that's so commonly put forward today now inside that wall garden is a couple of trees and Adam and Eve and some animals and all of that and unfortunately the tree happens to have a snake wrapped around it now that's an interesting thing we're going to talk about that a lot and the snake in both of these representations is no ordinary snake say it's got a human head and it's got a human head there too so whatever that snake is well let's forget about looking at this from a religious perspective like if you can just imagine that you're an anthropologist we've never seen this image before it's like what do you see well you see walls and you see something a fairly Pleasant enclosure and then you see a tree and people are eating from the tree but the tree has a snake in it that has a human head and so then you might think well what's a snake with a human head and then you'd think well it's half snake and half human that's hardly revelatory it's just self evidence so whatever that snake is isn't just a snake it's snake and human or it's it's its snake and partakes in whatever human beings are and that's very important so we'll continue we'll consider that later and you see the same thing here and and you see in this particular version there's the head this one also has wings and so this is a winged snake sort of like a dragon and so it curls on the ground like a reptile and it's got an aerial aspect or a spiritual aspect so here it's a snake which is like the lowest form of of reptilian life say something that crawls on the ground it's something that's human and something that's spiritual at the same time and it inhabits the tree which look a lot like magic mushrooms by the way and you can look that up if you want that's quite an interesting little rabbit hole to wander down if you're curious about it but but there's an idea here too is that there was something in the garden at the beginning of time that was like a snake that was like a person that was like something that was winged it was something spiritual so it's spiritual human and reptilian all at the same time and it's the animating spirit of the tree okay so keep that in mind thus the heavens and the earth were finished this is in relationship to Genesis one and all the host of them and on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made and God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created the need that's wisdom in that one - I think the idea of the Sabbath you know because one of the things I've worked with a lot of people who were hyper conscientious and thing about hyper conscientious people is that they'll just work til they die and that's actually not very productive because then they're dead and they can't work and so what you have to do with hyper conscientious people is you have to say well I know you'd rather do nothing but work and maybe you're just as guilty as you can possibly be when you're not working but let's figure out what you're up to and what you're up to in all probability is the attempt to be productive in the least problematic longest sustaining possible manner and that might mean you have to take a rest and so one of the things I used to work with lawyers with people who had risen to the top of large law firms and they were hyper productive types they're often you know trying to hit their impossible quota for yearly hours and and burning themselves to a frazzle as a consequence and one of the things that we used to do was he couldn't work fewer hours because that a day that just didn't work but what we did was we have them take more time off you know like a four-day weekend every two months or something that was plotted out into the future and then we track their billable hours which is the degree of productivity it would actually increase so that was so cool because you could take hard-working people and you could say look you know take a break why well because you'll be more productive if you take a break no that couldn't possibly be like I should just work flat out all the time it's like to test that out you take a break now on that it's like well what happened was their productivity would increase often by 10% so there's a there's wisdom here too which is okay and this is alludes to the Adam and Eve story near the end you're self-conscious you discover the future you have to work well then the question is how much should you work and one answer is you better bloody well work all the time because no matter how much work you do you're not solving your problems they're coming along man and you can stack up all the money you want you can stack up all the wealth you want it is not going to protect you in the final analysis so you better be hitting the ground running and you better run flat out all the time well what happens if you do that well then you die that's not a good solution so maybe you should rest and so how does that rest get instantiate it well it's not easy to tell but one way to do it let's say conceptually is to say look even God had the rest one day a week and so you don't have to be so presumptuous to assume that if God had dressed one day a week that maybe you know you are allowed to work non-stop without a break at all you know and I think our culture has slipped into that in quite a dangerous way because everything is open all the time and I mean I find that just as convenient as the rest of you but you know it's so strange to talk to modern people because one of the things they always tell you we say well how are you and what do they always say they don't say good they don't say bad they say busy like yeah well okay this is where Genesis 2 starts and we finally got there these are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created in the day that the Lord God made the earth in the heavens and every plant of the field before it was in the earth and every herb of the field before it grew for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth and there was not a man to till the ground but there went up a mist from the earth and watered the whole face of the ground and the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and man became a living soul well you know there's some archaic thinking and there the breath is life right that's psyche that's spirit that's inspiration that's respiration that's that's also citizens it's numa like pneumatic hire its its breath and the reason that people associated life with breath well that's not so foolish you know I mean you're breathing man and something you do all the time and when you die you start breathing and so the idea that there's something integral to life about breathing it's a perfectly reasonable supposition it actually happens to be very true and now then to associate the act of creation with the act of first of all inspiration and respiration and and the breathing of life into something that was inanimate is is well what do you expect for a one-sentence description it's not a bad one sentence description you know so and the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden and Eden means well watered place and that's particularly relevant I suppose if you're a desert dweller right because the issue there is can you get enough water to make things grow and so the the walled garden which is paradise is also Eden which is a well watered place and water has the element of chaos we already saw that in relationship to Genesis one where the underlying chaos was often assimilated symbolically to water and so the idea too is that a certain amount of chaos has to be brought into the order in order for it to be fruitful and you can see that in the form of allowing in the water and out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food The Tree of Life also in the midst of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil so two trees are marked out among the rest one is the Tree of Life and one is the tree of the knowledge of good and evil now you know you know when you read something like that if you're thinking about it that you're in a metaphorical space now we've got to be careful about metaphors because you know I could say yeah that the chaos order idea is a metaphor but then I also said oh wait a second it's a metaphor but it's also what your brain is adapted to and so you know let's just not be pushing the idea that it's merely a metaphor too hard and the same thing is here is happening here these are metaphors the tree of life when the tree of the knowledge of good and evil but that doesn't exactly mean that they're mere metaphors because sometimes as I mentioned before and as if you have a set of things and you abstract out from them a common element you can make a strong case that the common element is more real than the set of things from which you extracted it that's the whole utility in abstraction why would you bother with it otherwise if you can't take a set of things and say look there's something in common across the set of things it's more important than the differences between them then you wouldn't bother abstracting at all and so the Tree of Life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil are abstractions now one of the questions is this is a tough one man I've been trying tried to figure out for a long time why a fruit and something you eat would be associated with the transformations of psychology because that's basically what happens in the Adam and Eve story why would it be something that you eat now Eric Newman who is one of Ewing students had written a fair bit about this and got a fair ways with it he said well you know we do have noted we've noticed forever that the act of eating especially if you're hungry especially if you're starving produces a rapid spiritual transformation right I mean some of you this is worth knowing you probably have a Crabby partner or child because everyone does and one thing you might try is that if they get erratic during the day and you know get all volatile about nothing at all just give them something to eat really I'll tell you man made this sauce if I do this with my clinical clients all the time it's like they say well I fly off the handle at the littlest things like okay yeah just try this for a week when you're crabby and unreasonable eat a piece of cheese or eat a peanut butter sandwich eat something that's high protein high fat and then just wait ten minutes and see if you're sane and you'll find out that you're saying after you eat so often that you just can't believe how crazy you are when you're hungry look here's it's really absolutely bloody remarkable so I'm telling you try this it'll-it'll especially if you don't eat breakfast this will change your life and so here's a practical bit of information for you too for all of you antisocial types who are going to end up in prison so if you're in prison and you want to go on parole okay so you have to go in front of the judge and tell them why you're not going to do it again so here's the deal here's the deal it doesn't really matter what you did and it doesn't really matter what you promise what matters is whether you see the judge before lunch or after lunch because if you see the judge after lunch probability that you'll get parole is 60% higher yeah right that is just like so never have an argument with your partner when you're hungry or when they're hungry especially if you want something from them it's like here's the sandwich they'll eat it then they'll be happy then you can manipulate them because before that man no so you know it's not that unreasonable to think that there's a spirit in food because food rejuvenates and it just doesn't rejuvenate you physically it rejuvenates you spiritually and then of course there's the other things that we consume that aren't exactly like food that have a walloping spiritual impact like alcohol let's say which is a spirit and is regarded Dionysius right I mean it's the god of the vine and the god of the vine possesses you and makes you act all the fun ways that alcohol makes you act you know the fun ways that you regret the next day and so there's the spiritual element of that too and and then but there's something even deeper that I think is so cool that's associated with food and information because the story of Adam and Eve represents the fruit as producing a psychological transformation and so the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is an abstraction across trees and it's trying to say here's something that's common across trees it's it's a fruit that's common across trees it's something like that and so the fruit across its common across trees is something you might call food fair enough that's a generalization but here's something that's even more cool the food that's stable across the entire domain of food isn't food it's information its information and we use the same bloody circuits in our brain to forage for information that squirrels use to forage for food but animals used to forage for food it's the same circuit and why is that because we figured out that knowing where things is knowing where the food is is more important than having the food and so so knowing where the food is is a form of massive food information is a form of meta food and once you have well that's why we're information foragers and so once you grasp that and and that ideas is embedded into the story of Adam and Eve so whatever it is that they ingest is a form meta food it's it's infinite information and and you know we'll trade food for information right so if you're stuck on the edge of the highway and you know your your hoods up and you're you're going places thing has turned into a pile of junk that you don't understand and somebody pulls beside you up beside you in their mechanic and they point to something to say well just put that wire back on there you'll immediately give them a sandwich right or you'll offer them something in return you know what I mean because they've provided you with information that has value and it has value because it actually provides you with energy because information provides you with energy because otherwise why would we bother with it and so food provides energy but so does information and so there's the there's the idea of food that you abstract from everything you can eat but then there's the idea of what you could abstract from all sources of food and the answer to that would be information and the trees that are being referred to in Adam and Eve are these method trees they're not ordinary trees just like paradise is no ordinary place like Adam and Eve are no ordinary people and just like the logos that God is using at the beginning of time is no ordinary conception and these aren't they're not metaphors there more than metaphors there I think of them as hyper realities it's something like that is there more real than what you see there more real than the reality that presents itself to you and lots of things are like that right numbers are like that we wouldn't think or abstract if there weren't things that were more real than what we can see so what's most real well that's partly what we're trying to figure out and out of the ground make the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food The Tree of Life also in the midst of the garden and the tree of knowledge of good and evil and a river went out of Eden to water the garden and from thence it was parted and became into foreheads that's produced a tremendous amount of speculation now you know the Garden of Eden is also the holy city that's another way of thinking about or it's Jerusalem right or it's the ideal state which could be the ideal city or to be an ideal state of being or could be the ideal site here if all of those things stacked up at the same time right this is a Mandela and this is the Mandela form that people what we call hypothesised that constituted the structure of paradise you notice it's got this cross form that's eaten itself and there's the the center of Eden and there's the rivers those are rivers not snakes those are the rivers that go out of it and they're turned into these mandela images that are representative of what Jung described as the self which would be the center element of being that he associated of conscious being that he associated with divinity I would say but also with the idea of the holy city so I'm just showing you that to show you what where the imagination has taken ideas of paradise so the name of the first river is Pisan that is which compasses the whole land of havilah whether is gold and the gold of that land is good there's bdellium and the Onyx stone and the name of the second river is gijón the same is it that compasseth the whole land of ethiopia and the name of the third river is heady kal or Hideki I don't know that is it which goes towards the east of Assyria and the fourth River is the Euphrates so there's this strange intermingling there of geography with mythical geography right which you see happen fairly frequently in the books and the Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to dress it and keep it okay so that's that's a good that's a good command that's what you're supposed to do is take care of the damn thing with a lot of work to make right took a whole week and the Lord God commanded the man saying of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not eat of it for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die well there's a sponge of questions there that people have been puzzling they're puzzling over for a long time gaudy he's tricky character in the story of Adam and Eve it's like okay if we can't eat the damn thing well why put in the garden to begin with that would be one question and you made us and then you told us not to eat this knowing perfectly well that the first thing we were going to do is eat it because people are of exactly that type which is that if you say to them with their insatiable curiosity this is all fine and nice but over here is something you should never look at and then you leave the room it's like everybody is over there trying to figure what the hell that thing is instantly right because we're curious curious curious curious creatures and so you have to wonder exactly what God was up to here and there's Gnostic speculation that the original God was not really a very good God he was kind of an unconscious evil god and that he wanted his creation to be unconscious and so forbade them from developing consciousness and that it was a higher God who and maybe in the form of the serpent who tempted human beings towards consciousness and you know that that idea got scrubbed out of classic Christianity pretty early although there's something that's interesting about it and there are remnants of it in different forms that stayed inside the story like the idea that the fall was you know a terrible tragedy but on the other hand it was the precondition for the greatest event in history which was the birth of Christ and the redemption of mankind and so it's complicated let's put it that way god only knows what God was up to but you know this is a good example of that ambivalence to me again that it's an indication of the sophistication of the people who put these stories together I also consider this somewhat miraculous because you know if you were just a simple propagandist of sorts you wouldn't leave this sort of complexity in the text you just get rid of that because if you're a propagandist everything is supposed to make sense along the ideological plane and here God is supposed to be good it's like well we better get there to that line because something's up with it and obvious what it is but that isn't what people did and to me that indicates that that they were doing two things as they were trying not to be too careless with the traditions that they were handed they they were they were touching them at their peril they were very careful with them and also that they were actually trying to understand what was going on because why otherwise keep this why not just simplify it or maybe just to tribute this to the devil that would be easier and having God do it but and the Lord God said it is not good that man should be alone I will make help meet for him none of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field at every fall of the air and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them and whatsoever Adam called every living creature that was the name thereof and Adam gave names to all the cattle in the fall of cattle means animals basically and to the fall of the air and every beast of the field but for Adam there was not found to help meet for him okay well a couple of things there speculations number one it's like why does God care what Adam calls the animals and the answer that seems to be it's associated again with the magic of speech right so that we know according to the story that human beings were already made in the image of God and that God used language in order to call order forth from chaos and that human beings were made in that image and so there's an echo of that here even though it's from an independent tradition in the echo is the thing isn't quite real till you name it and that's quite and that's that's an interesting thing and we don't exactly know how far that extends it's certainly the case that like seeing things often exist in a strange potential form interconnected form where everything's confusing like a massive confusion before you put your finger on it name it what's going on here you name it it's like it it carves it out from all that underlying chaos it makes it into Agrippa Belen today that you can then contend with and you might say well it was real before you named it it's like well yes it was real before you named it the same way things are there when there's no one there to perceive them and it isn't obvious how things are there when you're not there to perceive them I'll tell you something bloody weird about perception you can look this up at John Wheeler John Leader's a physicist so here's a really cool thing let's say you go outside at night and you look up and you see a star and like so a photon from That star enters your eye then maybe that photon has been cruising along for like 30 million years do you know that that photon would not have been emitted from that star at that time if your eye wasn't there at that time to receive it you think well how the hell can that because it happened 20 million years ago it's like well I don't know how it can be to tell you the truth but I know that John Wheeler has done a very good job of detailing out why that's true and necessarily true and so in wheeler is also the physicists who develop the notion of it from bit and he believes that the world is best construed as a the potential of the world is best construed as a place of information it's something like leading information and at what consciousness does is transform the latent Internet in information into something like concrete reality he doesn't mean that metaphorically and one of the cases that he makes in that regard is this story that I just told you is that the photon couldn't have left from where it was unless it had a place to go now it's it's complicated and confusing because from the perspective of a beam of light from a photon there is no time and there's no distance from one point to another when of course that's completely impossible to understand - but from the perspective of a photon the universe is completely flat perpendicular to the direction that the photon is traveling so it's there and here at the same time for us it's not it's like 20 million years ago but for the photon it's it's all here and now so anyways the reason I'm telling you all that is because the relationship between consciousness and reality is by no means straightforward it is seriously not straightforward and physicists physicists debate what the relationship is between consciousness and reality and they debate about what the sort of phenomena that I just described mean and I'm not really qualified to enter into that debate because I'm not a physicist but I do know and I've read it for a bit of wheeler as but as much of it as I can understand and I do at least know that that's what he claimed and I also know that that claim is not that's the claim that's taken seriously among physicists of the caliber of the physicists who can understand wheeler so that's pretty interesting so anyways there is emphasis again on this importance of naming in order to make things real you know and sometimes people won't name things just so they don't become real so you know if you're if you have a relationship which undoubtedly you do and it has problems which undoubtedly it does you bloody well know that lots of times there's something under the carpet that no one wants to name and everybody's thinking well as long as we don't name it it's not really there and in some sense it really isn't there because you could act as if it's not there and get away with it at least for short periods of time it sees you name that thing it's like you give it form and it's there and no one can ignore it and that's annoying because then you have to deal with it or Noor or face the consequences but the reason I'm telling you that is because we have a an intuition even that we can have things not exist by not naming them you name it and it comes forward with staggering clarity and it's not as if naming it is the only thing that gives it reality but it is something like it sharpens it brings it into focus and gives it borders and barriers and borders and boundaries and so anyways gods interested enough in what Adam has to say that he has him name all the animals and that sort of makes them into animals now there's more to the linguistic story than that so the social psychologist Roger Brown was one of them studied this really interesting phenomena which is associated with relationship between perception and action you know how a kid will call a particular animal a cat well the word cat is very short like the word dog and it turns out that you know you could think that we could perceive cats as multicellular organisms like we could see the cells we could see the molecules we could see the atoms we could see or we could see the ecosystem that the cat is part of but we don't or maybe the broader mammalian classification that it's part of we could perceive that as the unit of perception but we don't we perceive things at the level of cat and you can tell the perceptual level that people naturally perceive that which doesn't seem to be socio-culturally determined to any great degree by the way because the words are often short and easily remembered and early learned and so there's this level of analysis out of all the possible levels of analysis that the world does exist that we perceive it at a certain level of analysis and that level of analysis seems to have something to do with the world's functional utility for us at that level and the perception at that level and the naming at that level gives things a reality at that level you know because the thing about things is that they're not easily separable from other things they tangled together in all sorts of strange ways and yet when we cast our eye and and use our language to orient ourselves in the world we cut things up into discrete discriminable objects that we can then utilize and there's something about that that makes them real in a way that they're interconnected potential the interconnected potential that they were before that that it's not it's not real in the same way at least I think it's even less real I think that's the right way of thinking about it even though it's not completely unreal but it's an echo atoms a little God at that point a little God the Father and God's already done the groundwork but Adam has to come along and says say well that's a cat it's like poof whatever that is is now a cat and that's dog and that's a sheep and you know it gives them it gives them something like pragmatic form but for Adam there was not found to help meet for him and the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam and he slept and he and God took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh instead thereof and the rib which the Lord God had taken from man made he a woman and brought her unto the man and Adam said this is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh she shall be called woman because she was taken out of man therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother and shall cleave unto his wife and they shall be one flesh that's a walloping statement to put in there at the end of those three sentences and therefore comes as somewhat of a surprise but there's an injunction there well it's a good injunction man you'll tell you people who don't do that they have a hell of a time in their marriage and so this is a good thing to know if you are married or if you're planning to get married is like you know we have very strong orientation towards our parents and for good reason it's like the injunction here is that secondary since you're married and and failure to do that makes your marriage collapse and then you deserve it to collapse - as far as I'm concerned because it's a reflection of your pathological immaturity and your unwillingness to extract yourself from the you know tellin like grip of parents who are a little bit too much on the interfering side but the injunction there's a deep injunction here it's very complicated so one of the ideas is that the original Adam wasn't a man like like a separate man it was more like a hermaphroditic being and in that him alfred etic being there was a kind of undifferentiated perfection and then that was split into male and female and then that part of the goal of human beings is to reunite that as the singular unity that reestablishes the initial perfection and that's actually the goal of marriage from a spiritual perspective and you could read about that if you read young because he wrote quite a bit about that so lovely it's such a good idea so I had these friends that went to Sweden to get married they were northern they were from northern Alberta but his heritage their both their Heritage's were Sweden Swedish and in this ceremony they did this cool thing yes they were being married and they had two hold a candle up between them right while they were being married and you think well okay what's the candle that's a source of light the source of illumination right the source of enlightenment it's the candle that you put on Christmas trees in Europe so it's the light that emerges in the darkness in the depth of winter it's a symbol of life in darkness it's the reemergence of the Sun that the at the darkest coldest time of the year which is also associated symbolically with the birth of Christ for all sorts of complicated reasons and so the candles all that and then the next question is why do you hold it above you and the answer is because what's above you is what you're below too so it's single simplify something transcendent and so why do you both hold on to it well because you're both supposed to hold on to the light right and you're supposed to be subordinate to the light and so you ask well who's in charge in marriage well the light that's the idea so you come together as one thing you no longer two things it isn't what's good for you and it's not what's good for your wife it's what's good for the marriage and the marriage is about the combined being which is the reassembly of the original hefferman herma frenetic hermaphroditic being at the beginning of time that's the idea and that's all packed into like these four sentences and you know there's been well all of these sentences have tremendous history of interpretation associated with them right it's just endless and endless and endless and that's one of the lines and so it's also an antidote to the idea that women taken out of man which is obviously the reverse of the biological process by the way makes women in some sense subordinate to man that is not built into this text I don't see that at all is built into the text and there's something else that's associated with it too and there's an idea that you know in in Sleeping Beauty you know what Sleeping Beauty goes to sleep and the reason she goes to sleep is because you have to remember what happens is she has parents who are quite old and so they're pretty desperate to have a child like so many people are now and they only have one child like so many people do now and they wanted it happen to this child because like hey it's a miracle and there's only one of them and so she's the princess and so it's like we're not letting anything around here so they have a big christening party right and they invite everybody but they don't invite Maleficent and Maleficent is the terrible mother she's nature she's like the thing that goes bump in the night she's the devil herself so to speak she's everything that you don't want your child to encounter so the king and queen saying well we just want to invite her to the christening it's like good luck with that that's an eatable story right the eatable mother is the mother who devours her child by refusing by over protecting him or her so that instead of being strengthened by an encounter with the terrible world they're weakened by too much protection and then when they're let out into the world they cannot live and that's the story of Sleeping Beauty and that's what the king and queen do and they apologize to the two Maleficent when she first shows up and say well you know they have a bunch of half-witted excuses why they don't invite her we forgot like I don't think so you know you don't forget something like that and she kind of makes that point it's right the whole horror of life you don't forget about that when you have a child that's for sure you might wish that it would stay at bay but you do not forget about it the question is do you invite it to the party and the answer is it bloody well depends how unconscious you want your child to be and if you want your child to be unconscious well then you have the added advantage but maybe they won't leave home and so you can take advantage of them for the rest of your sad life instead of going off to find something to do for yourself well and then of course you can take revenge on them if they do have any any what would you call impetus towards courage that you sacrificed yourself 30 years ago and want to stamp out as soon as you see it developing your child that's another thing that would be quite pleasant and so that's what happens in Sleeping Beauty yeah well none of this is pleasant and nothing that happens in that story is pleasant so Sleeping Beauty she's naive as hell they put her out in the forest and have her raised by these three like goody-two-shoes fairies that are also completely devoid of any real potency and power right there's no nothing Maleficent about them and then the first idiot Prince that wanders by she falls in love with so badly that she has post-traumatic stress disorder when he rides off on his horse great that's what happened and then she then she goes into the castle and she's all freaked out because she met the love of her life for like five minutes for God's sake and you know that's when the spinning wheel that's the Wheel of Fate pops up and she pricks her finger right I try to get rid of all the spinning wheels they try to get rid of all the wheels of fate with her pointed end but she finds it poke pricks her fingers and frame her and falls down unconscious while she wants to be unconscious and no bloody wonder she was protected her whole life she's so damn naive that her first love affair just about kills her she wants to go to sleep and never wake up and so that's exactly what happens and then she has to wait for the prince to come and rescue her well you think how sexist can you get that story well seriously because that's that's the way that that would be read and in the modern world it's like she doesn't need a prince to rescue her that's why I Disney made frozen that absolutely appalling piece of rubbish so you know you can say you can say well the princess doesn't need a prince to rescue her but you know that's a boneheaded way of looking at the story because the prince isn't just a man who's coming to rescue the woman and believe me he's got his own problems right he's got a whole goddamn dragon he has to contend with but but the prince also represents the woman's own consciousness the consciousness is presented very frequently in story that's symbolically masculine as it is with the logos idea and the idea is that without without that forward going courageous consciousness a woman herself will drift into unconsciousness and terror and so you can read it as well the woman who's sleeping needs a man to wake her up and of course just like a man needs a woman to wake him up it's the same damn thing that's the dragon fight in Sleeping Beauty but it's also the case that if she's only unconscious all she can do is lay there and sleep like the sleep of the naive and Damned she has to wake and wake herself up and and bring her own consciousness or own masculine consciousness into the forefront so that she can survive in the world of course women are trying to do that like mad but that's partly what's represented in the story like that and that's partly what's implicit in this idea is that unless the woman is taken out of man so to speak then she isn't a human being she's just a creature and that's partly what's embedded in this story so you don't want to read it as a patriarchal you want to read anything that way so really it's it really it's yeah I will I won't bother without but really we can do better than that man therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother and shall cleave unto his wife and they shall be one flesh it's like ya seeing the other thing about marriage this is really worth knowing too is that I've learned this in part from reading young it's like what do you do when you get married that's easy you take someone who's just as useless and horrible as you are and then you shackle yourself to them and then you say we're not running away no matter what happens yeah well that that's perfect because then you don't get to run away and the thing is is like if you can run away you can't tell each other the truth because if you tell someone the truth about you and they don't run away they weren't listening and so if you don't have someone around the can't run away then you can't tell them the truth and so that's part of the purpose of the marriage it's like okay okay I'll bet on you you bet on me it's a losing bet we both know that but given our current circumstances were unlikely to find anyone better that's for sure you know there's two things that come off of that one is you know people are waiting around to find mr. or mrs. right it's like here's something to think about man to put yourself on your feet right if you went to a party and you found mr. right and he looked at you and didn't run away screaming that would indicate that he wasn't mr. right at all right it's like the old Nietzsche and joke if someone loves you that should immediately disenchant you with them right right or it's the Woody Allen joke I never belonged to a club that would take me as a member so so that's a that's an interesting that's a very interesting thing to think about and so you're going to shackle yourself to someone who's just as imperfect as you are and then the issue is you you you might be in a situation where you can actually negotiate because you might say well there's some things about you that aren't going so right and there's some things about me that aren't going so right and we're bloody well stuck with the consequences for the next 50 years so we could we can either straighten this out or we can suffer through it for the next five decades and you know people are of this or that without that degree of seriousness those problems will not be solved you'll leave things unnamed because there's always an ounce like and it's the same thing when you're living together with someone you know that people who live together before they're married are more likely to get divorced not less likely and the reason for that is what exactly are you saying to one another when you live with each other just think about it well for now you're better than anything else I can trick but I'd like to reserve the right to trade you in conveniently if someone bitter happens to stumble into me well how could how could someone not be insulted to their core by an offer like that now they're willing to play along with it because they're going to do the same thing with you now well that's exactly and it's like yeah yeah I know you're not going to commit to me so that means you don't value me or our relationship above everything else but as long as I get to escape if I need to then I'm willing to put up with that it's like that's a hell of a say I mean you might think how stupid is it to shackle yourself to someone it's like it's stupid man there's no doubt about that but compared to the alternatives it's pretty damn good because without that shackling there are things you will never ever learn because you'll avoid them you can always leave and if you can leave then you don't have to tell each other the truth it's as simple as that because you can just leave and then you don't have anyone you can tell the truth to so there are some representations of the idea of the original it's not this isn't all Adam this is this is an old Chinese symbol I think it's Fuxi and new I think I have the pronunciation wrong but it's really cool see it's see the snakes down here they're kind of like a DNA symbol which I find very interesting and so that's the original cosmic serpent that's sort of the potential out of which that emerges and then that's the differentiation of that into male and female and so that's like the predatory unknown that's one way of thinking about it that's the most fundamental conception of mankind is something like that is the predatory unknown and then the bifurcation of that into the two fundamental cognitive elements of human perception masculine and female and you see the same thing here this is Chinese this is Egyptian also extraordinarily old it's the it's the great serpent that underlies everything Matt advocating itself into Isis queen of the underworld and Osiris king of the king of king of King Pharaoh king of order you see the same thing in an old alchemical symbol I love this one it looks quite a lot like the little thing that Harry Potter chases around it yeah and that's not accidental by the way because the seeker is the thing the thing that chases this and the seeker that chases this and catches it wins and that's a really old idea and how the hell'd JK Rowling knew that I cannot figure out because that is a very very archaic symbol arcane symbol on Google it's called the round chaos and the only reference to the round chaos that I can find on Google is on my web page and so I have no idea how Rowling came up with that I mean I know she looked at a lot of old texts but the idea that if you play the meta game and you catch this you win all the games is exactly right not and that's the motif for what's the name of that Quidditch yeah so there's the potential that's like the potential out of which God made the world at the beginning of time and what emerges out of that is some kind of that's a dragon you know that in the dragon fight that's partly the serpent that's in the Garden of Eden and then that's the manifestation of masculine and feminine out of that potential predatory unknown masculine and feminine it's like a single it's like a single representation of the evolutionary history of human cognitive consciousness so cool and that's also an image of the ideal it's the union of Sun and Moon and it's this hyper creature hermaphroditic it's also the Adam and Eve that existed at the beginning of time before the fall and it's the purpose of marriage all of that as a sacrament all of that in these images it's just absolutely unbelievable what images can pack into them and there's a more classical representations of Eve being extracted from Adam and this is a cool line and they were both naked the man and his wife and we're not ashamed well that see someone who wrote that would only write that like that if they were surprised that they weren't ashamed because why would you point it out otherwise and so there's this intimation that of two things number one is there was a point at time in time when human beings were naked and they weren't ashamed of it and there is a point of time which is now where they're naked and they are ashamed of it and then the question is well what's the association with nakedness and shame and that's all often given a sexual connotation in in classic interpretations of the Adam and Eve story because of its association with nudity I presume but I think it's a lot more complicated than that so you think I know I would notice my daughter she probably won't be very happy that I'm revealing this in this lecture but my daughter was never really concerned about nudity when she was a little kid all the same to her one way or another but my son by the time he was three man that kid was private he his his bedroom door was shut the bathroom door was shut it was like get the hell out of here and that seemed to just happen of its own accord and you know we had two children and one was like that the other one wasn't I didn't think we had much to do with it at all but it was really fascinating to watch that emerge in him and you know that that sense of of self-consciousness does seem to emerge in children somewhere around the age of three and you know that's generally also when we start thinking that maybe having your baby wander around naked on a beach isn't exactly the best idea there's this there's something like that it's the nudity and children is generally okay under some circumstances in public display we seem to think of that as merely as acceptable why I don't know why it stops being acceptable well that has something to do with sexuality obviously but it's a very complicated phenomena but you know that whole nudity thing is then is a very complicated thing I mean first of all people are kind of strange because we're hairless roughly you know compared to most animals and we don't know why that is some people think it's because we lost our heroin we're wandering around in the debt in the desert running around in Africa because we're really really good runners we can run down animals say like a human being in good shape can run a horse to death in a week we can really run man and a lot of our ancestors the Kalahari Bushmen still do this they just run an animal for like until it dies and that Bushman doesn't die I mean they also sometimes shoot them with poison arrows but they can just run them till they die so we have tremendous endurance and you and you have to be able to get rid of a lot of heat if you're going to run around in the desert so we don't have much hair that's one explanation and Buckminster Fuller had an interesting explanation which was he thinks that at some point during our evolution we spend a lot of time near the water and so we're like fish Apes something like that well you know we like to be on the beach and there's lots of food there and we like to swim and we're really good at swimming for terrestrial creatures and we cry salt tears like some seagoing creatures - and women have a layer of subcutaneous fat like some seagoing creatures - and we have kind of our feet are which are very odd things are kind of good for flapping in the water although we can also walk with them and so he thought that maybe that adaptation was too water existence like seals and so forth like we kind of went back to the ocean but not quite and so but anyways the evolution of that hairlessness is an interesting thing but it certainly does make us exposed to the world in a way that animals that have a covering of fur aren't and then we're upright which is very strange because most animals aren't they're on all fours and so they're very vulnerable parts are protected and not exposed to view and then of course when you're standing up nude your your your visit let's call it your psychophysiological quality is on painful display right and people complain about that all the time you know if you look at the feminist tack for example on beauty the idea that women have eating disorders is directly attributed to the presence of too many beautiful women on the cover of magazines something like that even though women buy those magazines and they're attracted to the bandar mood goes up when they purchase them and if the if the stimulus was negative the women would avoid the magazines and not buy them so as a theory it's a very very bad one but it's still the case that you know it's still the case that standards of beauty shame people and that's for sure and everyone because if you're not ugly now man you're going to be at some point in your life so that's kind of a rough thing to contend with right it's it's a rough thing to to know that that there's an ideal that you could be and maybe even one swear that you're not going to be for long or Norden or never were and it's really an appalling issue because I think it's harder on women because women are judged by men more for their what for their youth and fertility that's how it turns out from the evolutionary point of view men are judged more on their socioeconomic status by women it's harsh both ways but so anyways it's you know it's a terrible thing to to carry the knowledge with you that you're exposed to the most serious possible evaluation of the quality of your being that you can possibly be exposed to all the time and that that's further amplified if you're without clothing and so part of clothing is protection but a tremendous amount of it is merely stopping other people from evaluating you too harshly all the time it just gets in the way so anyways this store this this story makes the case that at some point we would like that well animals aren't like that so it seems perfectly plausible at at some point we weren't like that but at some point that changed and they were both naked the man and his wife and we're not ashamed of a serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made and he said unto the woman yea hath God said ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden I like this this is um oh I can't remember who did the edging yell who is it da-rae yeah DeRay exactly he door a did etchings for Paradise Lost that are absolutely remarkable and this is Satan and this is the snake here and of course in the Genesis story Satan is weirdly associated with the snake and I'll tell you that's a that's a that's a tough one to sort out because in the story of Adam and Eve there's no indication whatsoever that the serpent who tempts Eve is also Satan the author of all evil and how in the world those two stories got tangled together well I think I figured that out and I'm going to tell you that tonight but it took a very long time to figure it out and it's absolutely it's so bloody brilliant I just can't believe that people figured it out it's so it's so unbelievably spectacularly brilliant and that's a that's a an intimation of that idea right that there's a kinship between these two things so anyways the serpents more subtle than any beast of the field subtle is an interesting word this is from the oxford english dictionary so because will amplify the word a bit this is what you do in Union dream interpretation for example is to kind of look at the connotations of the concepts that are associated with the dream subtle of a person or animal and action behavior crafty cunning sly treacherous so it's something that sort of sneaks along right it's not something that you really pick up on that easily of a look or glance sly furtive surreptitious of a person skillful expert clever of a work of art mechanical device cleverly made or designed ingenious well that that's I think that's all fairly all those terms so far are fairly well attributed to snakes I mean they are very cool things and and they are very well designed they're quite remarkable and they're also very subtle on the nature of or involving careful discrimination of fine points or fine points difficult to understand and abstruse of a person the mind or intellectual activity intellectual activity characterized by wisdom and perceptiveness discriminating discerning and truth that's interesting because Milton's Satan is also the intellect and you know you see that very often you know it's so often the bad guys an evil scientist right and there's something about and then you see the same thing in the Lion King with scar I mean scars and intellect and arrogant deceitful intellect there's nothing stupid about scar he's not wise but he's the he's the evil voice that's always whispering in the Kings ear and that's associated with the pride of the intellect and the Catholics had warned warned humanity about the pride of the intellect for centuries that's partly what produced somewhat of the schism between Catholicism and science although that's much overstated if you look at the historical record the idea was that the intellect has its own particular it's a remarkable faculty let's say it's the highest angel in God's heavenly kingdom that's the way that Milton portrayed it but it's also the thing that can go most terribly wrong because intellect the intellect can become arrogant about its own existence and accomplishments and it can fall in love with its own products and that's what happens when your ideological II possessed because you end up with a Dogma like say a human constructed Dogma in Solzhenitsyn's words that possesses you completely of which you believe is 100% right right so it eradicate the necessity for anything transcendent and so that's the subtil element of the intellect that's associated symbolically with the snake in the garden of paradise of a feeling scent sensation acute and keen involving distinctions that are finer delicate especially to such an extent as to be difficult to discern or analyze also almost imperceptible and elusive having little thickness or breadth thin fine subtil matter now historical rarefied mouth barely there at all and the women said unto the serpent we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden one of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden God this God has said he shall not eat of it neither shall you touch it lest you die and the serpent said to the woman ye shall not surely die for God doth know in the day that you eat thereof then your eyes shall be opened and you shall be as God's knowing good and evil sneaky subtle it's a nice story a the first thing is for instance the instant implication is well you can't trust God so that's pretty sneaky and the next is when he's trying to he's trying to pull a fast one on you and the next one is what he's trying to do that because he's jealous and he doesn't want you to know things that he knows because that would be so good and he's lying to you anyways because you're not going to die and if you eat it contrary to what you've been informed then all that's going to happen is your eyes will be open and you'll be like God's knowing good and evil that sounds pretty damn good so you know a night I mean Eve but as she no and hold still wonder she's susceptible to such blandishments and it's quite interesting too because out of and Eve God tells Adam and Eve not to eat the damn fruit but they never promise not to write so they haven't promised they've just been told to and well should they be obedient well how obedient do you want your children to be you want them to be obedient enough so they don't get hurt but disobedience enough so that they go up in the world and do something courageous and they break some rules that they learn some things and so you know it's it's it's a very paradoxical story anyways the serpent one that wins this round man and so Eve pays attention to the snake so again we have the same set of images right we have Adam and we have Eve we have this tree and we have this strange serpent that's a dragon-like form they're a sphinx like form that's associated with the tree the snakes eternally associated with the tree well the snake wasn't eternally associated with the tree we spent god only knows how many tens of millions of years as tree dwelling primates and the primary or one of our primary predators we had three primary predators snakes birds cats and so the snake has been associated with the tree for a very very long time and the lesson the snake tells people is you bloody well better wake up or something you don't like will get you and who's going to be more susceptible susceptible to paying attention to the snake and that's going to be Eve and the reason for that is Eve has offspring and there's nothing tastier to a snake than a child and so Eve had every reason to be self-conscious and neurotic and women are more self-conscious and neurotic than men by quite a substantial amount and that's true cross culturally and it emerges at puberty and part of the reason is as far as we can tell is that women are more sexually vulnerable they're also smaller so that's a problem if you're engaged in a physical alteration but most importantly I think is that why would you ever assume that a human females nervous system is adapted to her or her well-being why wouldn't you assume instead that her nervous system is adapted to the female infant dyad because if it isn't then the infant's die and so you might take well women are way more susceptible to depression and anxiety than men are that's a hell of a burden to bear and that's also true cross culturally by the way and it also kicks in at puberty and the biggest differences are in Scandinavia for those of you who think it's socio-cultural which isn't so but there's reasons for it you know and it's also at puberty when men and women start to become sexually dimorphic in terms of size and men are way more powerful in their upper bodies it's incomparably more powerful and so that makes them a lot more dangerous and human human primary human defense mechanism is punching like with kangaroos for because there's a mother animals the punch chimps can punch too but human beings it's a punch and most of the force and that is upper-body and shoulder and so a woman's no match for a man in a fight so she has every reason to be nervous especially when you add that to that her additional sexual vulnerability and the fact that she has to take care of extraordinarily dependent infants who are extremely fragile for a very long period of time and so she had every and women are more self-conscious than men the empirical literature on that is clear it's associated with trait neuroticism because self-consciousness is actually an unpleasant emotion who wants to be self-conscious if I'm self-conscious on the stage talking to you then all of a sudden I can't even talk to you all I'm doing is thinking about me and all the things that are wrong with me and I fall inside myself it's like self-consciousness although it's a great gift let's say is nothing Pleasant its associated primarily with anxiety so we've had every reason to pay attention to the snake that's for sure I think I read this week that among can't remember which tribes minute where it was unfortunately although I did put a footnote in my new book about this these were jungled dwelling tribal people 5% of the adults had been attacked by a python and a substantial number of children had been killed by them so snake predation was no joke it shaped our evolutionary past and still is no joke in many places and so we're a tuned to snakes and the thing is as lynn has bel pointed out an anthropologist we are really good at detecting the camouflage patterns of snakes especially in the lower half of our visual field and there's evidence that part of the reason that human beings have such a cute vision which means that our eyes opened let's say is because we were we Co evolve with snakes and we learned how to see them and then the price we paid for seeing was that our brain grew because you need a lot of brain to be able to see and the consequence of our brain growing is one day we woke up and discovered the future and the future is where all the snakes might live instead of where they live right now so there's that the same thing and the same so interesting again these images you see in this one you have the specter of death in the tree with the snake and the fruit no fruit is interesting - I already made the case that there's a tight linkage between what you eat and information right a conceptual link as well as a practical link but it's also the case that we can see colors and the question is why and the answer is because we evolved to see ripe fruit so in the story of Adam and Eve human beings are given vision by the snake and the fruit and that turns out to be correct so isn't that something and then you think what role do women play in relationship to men well first they make them self conscious let's not ever forget about that because I would say the primary role that women have in relationship to manage to make them self-conscious and men don't precisely like that there's nothing that will make a man more self-conscious than being rejected and why because why is he rejected well obviously mother nature in the guise of that particular woman have said you're not so bad for a friend but there's no reason that your genetic material should propagate itself into the future right well it's not like men are exactly happy about being me but made self conscious by women right it's a major source of continual tension between men and women and it's no wonder but it's also the case and this is something really cool and interesting to know you know we'd evolved dive divulge guy whatever that's it diverged we diverged from the common ancestor between us and chimpanzees about six million years ago here's why at least in part chimpanzee females are non discriminant mater's they'll mate with any male when they go into heat which human females don't when they go into heat then any male is allowed access now the dominant males chase the subordinate males away and so the dominant males are more likely to leave offspring but it's not because of the female choice it's not the case with human beings human females engage in hypergamy and hypergamy is the ten this is also to cross culturally and it's also quite it's just as extensive in Scandinavia not quite there's a bit of attenuation but not much women mate across and up dominance hierarchies man-made across and down okay when that has to be the case because if obviously it has to work that way if one goes up the other has to go down the socio-economic status of a woman is almost determines almost zero of her attractiveness towards a man whereas the socioeconomic status of a man is a major determinant of his attractiveness towards a woman and it isn't as wealth either because that's been tested it's his capacity to generate and be productive and to share because that beats the hell out of wealth wealth can disappear right but the capacity to be productive and share that's that's a much more important element and why not be chosen on the basis of that especially because women have to have infants and infants make the women dependent and the woman is just looking logically rationally and from an evolutionary perspective for someone who's useful enough to give a tool and a hat so women make intense demands on man and it's no wonder but the thing is is that because women engaged in hypergamy at least in part we diverged quite rapidly from chimpanzees because the selection pressure that women placed on men developed the entire species now there's two things that happened as far as I could tell the men competed for competence let's say so the male hierarchy is a mechanism that pushes the best man to the top virtually by definition and then that's that's the effect of that is multiplied by the fact that women who are a program must peel from the top and so that the males who are the most competent are much more likely to leave offspring and that seemed to be what drove our cortical expansion for example which happened very very rapidly over the course of evolutionary time so and when the woman saw that the tree was good for food and it was pleasant to the eyes and a tree to be desired to make one wise she took of the fruit thereof and did eat and gave also unto her husband with her and he did eat oh yes and women share food that's a very strange thing because most creatures don't do that right most animals don't share food like if you if you're a wolf and you bring down something in a hunt you eat your fill the dominant mate creatures eat their fill and then if there's some left over the subordinates get to eat too but that isn't how human beings work we share food now you can imagine how that evolved because lots of female creatures share food with their offspring okay you don't need much of a twist in that from an evolutionary perspective til you start to share food not only with your offspring se but with your mate and that's another way that you entice a mate it's like we're going to be better together then alone well that's the offering of the fruit well what's the self conscious part well here's part of the bargain you know I'm going to wake you up and partly I'm going to wake you up because you need to be woken up because I have this infant that needs some damn care so you bloody well better be awake and part of the bargain is all offer you something I'll offer you some food and in response we're going to make a team and that's the deal on that's the human deal and that's why we're more or less monogamous by why we more or less pair bond and why something approximating marriage is a human Universal it's cross-cultural now you can find exceptions but who the hell cares just really man who cares the Vic you look at the vast pattern the vast pattern well in the price we pay for having large brains is that we're very dependent and it takes a long time for us to get programmed and because of that we need relatively stable family bonding and that's basically what we've evolved and you know you don't get that without making men self-conscious because male creatures why not impregnate and run I mean why the hell not and that's something to really no kidding like that's the thing to think about it is not why man abandoned their children that's the mystery it's why any men ever stick with them that's the mystery because you just have to look at the animal kingdom and that like the simplest and easiest thing is always the most likely thing to occur so it's the exception that long-term commitment that needs explanation she took of the fruit thereof and did eat and gave also unto her husband with her and he did eat and the eyes of both of them were opened implying that before that they were closed and they knew they were naked and they sewed fig leaves together and made themselves aprons so that's so interesting so their eyes are open which indicates that they weren't to begin with so whatever God created to begin with was kind of blind Indian but not blind in some strange way because they weren't obviously wandering around in the garden bumping into trees it was some sort of metaphysical blindness that's been removed by whatever has just happened and whatever's just happened also made them realize that they were naked okay so what sort of eye opening is that what does it mean to realize that you're naked it means to realize that you're vulnerable that's what people discovered it's like oh we can be hurt so you're a zebra in a herd of zebras and there's a bunch of lions around there laying on the grass you don't care those are laying down Lions laying down lions are no problem it's standing up hunting Lions that are the problem you're not smart enough to figure out that laying down lines turn into standing up hunting Lions so you're not like building a fort to keep the Lions out you're just mindlessly eating grass you're not very awake but that's not what happens to human beings is they wake up and they think we're vulnerable permanently it's never going away right it's the it's the recognition of that eternal vulnerability what happens the first thing they do is clothe themselves well what happens when you're naked when you need protection from the world well obviously look you're all wearing clothes you know why well we've been doing that for a very very long period of time it's tens of thousands of years at minimum factor you can track more or less when clothing developed because you can do DNA testing of the kind of lice that cling to clothes rather than hair and so we have a pretty good idea of when clothing emerged and of different types as well so that's quite cool but the point is they're naked and they think that's not so good we're vulnerable so their eyes were open enough so they become self-conscious and they recognize their own vulnerability and the first thing they do is the first step of culture is to protect themselves with something from the world and you protect yourself from the world and from the prying eyes of other people this is the book by Linnaeus Bell why we see so well from the temptation of the eve to the venomous murder of the Mighty Thor the serpent appears throughout time and culture as a figure of mischief and mystery misery the worldwide prominence of snakes and religion myth and folklore underscores our deep connection to the serpent but why when so few of us have first-hand experience the surprising answer this book suggests lies in the singular effect of snakes on primate evolution predation pressure from snakes líneas Bell tells us is ultimately responsible for the superior vision and large brains of primates and for a critical aspect of human evolution that was tested recently psychologists have known for a long time that people are can learn fear to snakes but they discovered in primates recently a set of neurons Palvin or neural neurons which are specialized that that's an old old perceptual systems reveal neurobiological evidence of past selection for rapid detections of snakes so that's from 2013 so the snake definitely woke us up color vision as an adaptation to fruit eating in primates it's not by accident that women make themselves look like ripe fruit in order to be attractive to men right and that's also not socio-cultural in origin so and they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord amongst the trees of the garden that's interesting so what's the implication prior to being woken up prior to recognizing nakedness and vulnerability there is no reason for God for men and women to hide from God now are they hiding from God while they're naked they're vulnerable ok so think about this think about this it's like imagine that you have the capacity to live truthfully and courageously and forthrightly just imagine that and then imagine why you might not do that and then imagine how about fear and shame how would that work well let's say that the idea of living forthrightly and truthfully and courageously is analogous given what we already know about these stories - walking with God in the garden what stops people from doing that what stops people from hiding well it's their own way it's a recognition of their own inadequacy they look at themselves and I think how in the world is a creature since his I supposed to live properly in this world with everything that's wrong with me and so what do you hide from well you you go home you sit on your bed for five minutes and ask yourself what have you hidden from in your life man you'll have books of knowledge reveal themselves to you in your imagination right so well why are you hiding well it's no bloody wonder you're hiding it's no wonder that people hide that's the thing that's so terrifying about this story we woke up and we thought oh my God look at this place like this is seriously there's some serious trouble here and we're in some serious trouble and we're not what we could be and so we hide and that's what the story says people woke up they became self-conscious they recognized their own vulnerability and that made them made them hide from manifesting their divine destiny it's like yeah that's exactly right and the Lord go there I love this part of the story and that's so funny and the Lord God called and we could use a little humor at this point and the Lord God called him to Adam and said unto Him where art thou and Adam said I heard thy voice in the garden and I was afraid because I was naked so in case there was any doubt about that that's why and I hid myself and God said who told you that you were naked did you eat of the tree where have I commanded you that you should not eat and this is where Adam shows himself in all his post-fall heroic glory and the man said the woman whom thou gave us to be with me she gave me of the tree and I did eat so that's that heard man that's such that it's so you know again there's a modern feminist interpretation of the story of Adam and Eve that makes the claim that Eve was portrayed as the universal bad guy of humanity for disobeying God and eating the Apple it's like fair enough you know looks like she slipped up and then she tempted her husband and you know that makes her even worse although he's was foolish enough to immediately eat so it just means she was a little more courageous than him then got there first but it's Adam who comes across as really one sad creature in this story as far as I'm concerned well c'mon he manages in one sentence it's like first of all it wasn't him it was the woman and since it even blames God more than just the woman it was that woman and you gave her to me and she gave me of the tree and I did eat it's like so hey Adams all innocent except now he's not only is he naked and disobedient and cowardly and ashamed he's also snively backbiting think he wraps her out like the sick and he gets the opportunity and then he blames God it's like and that's exactly right that's exactly right man you go online and you read you read the commentary that men write about women when they're resentful and bitter about women you read it it's so interesting it's like it's not me it's those bitches okay that's right it's not me it's them and not only that what a bloody world this is in which they exist it's exactly the same thing it's exactly the same thing and it is absolutely pathetic all right and the Lord God said unto the woman what is this that thou has done and the woman said the serpent beguiled me and I did eat well he she has a bloody excuse first of all it's a snake I mean those things are we already found out there's subtle and second it turns out that the damn snake is Satan himself you know and he's rather treacherous so the fact that she got tangled up in his mess let's say is well problematic but it's a hell of a lot better excuse that Adam has and the Lord God says unto the serpent because thou has done done this thou art cursed above all cattle and above every beast of the field upon thy belly shalt thou go and dust shalt thou eat all the days of my life and snakes by the way are lizards that lost their legs just so you know and I will put enmity between thee and the woman and between thy seed and her seed it shall bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his heel I love these pictures they're so smart and again strip the religious context from them and just look at them for a second what do you see you see the eternal mother holding her infant away from the snake see it down there right crocodile snake everything predatory that's been after us for like 60 million years the reason we're here is because of that that's why it's a sacred image you know this one I like even better see down there there's something like the moon and then there's a reptile down there that Eve is standing on this is really old and I showed you this before but I think it's so cool she's coming out of this thing that's like a hole in the sky you know because it indicates the eternal re presence of this figure it's something like that the eternal recurrence of this figure it's an archetype but then the potential out of which she is emerging these are all musical instruments back here and so what the artist is representing is the great patterns complexity of being and the emergence of the protective mother from that background protecting the infant eternally against predation it's like how can I not be a holy image if it isn't the holy image if you don't think it's a holy image then there isn't something wrong with the image there's something wrong with the perceiver until the woman he said well God's just outlining the consequences of this right now it's like okay well now you've gone and done it you've woken up this is what's going to happen I'll greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children and thy desire shall be to thy husband and he shall rule over thee to say he should says he will why in sorrow shalt thou bring forth children well when you develop a brain that big so that you can see it's not that easy to give birth anymore and then you produce something that's dependent the own belief and that's one of the things that you would say dooms you to precisely this sothat's ease punishment for waking up and Adam because thou has hearkened unto the voice of thy wife and his eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee saying thou shalt not eat it cursed is the ground for thy sake in sorrow shalt thou eat of it in all the days of thy life what's that the invention of work thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee and thou shalt eat the herb of the field it's the invention of work what do people do that animals don't work what does work mean means you've sacrificed the present for the future why do you do that because you know you're vulnerable because you're awake and so from here on in from this point there's no return to unconscious paradise I don't care how many problems you've solved so that today is okay you've got a lot of problems coming up and no bloody matter how much you work you're never going to work enough to solve them and so all you're going to do from here on in is be terrified of the future and that's the price of waking up and that's the end of paradise and that's the beginning of history and that's how that story goes in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return unto the ground for out of it was though taken for dust thou art and unto dust thou shalt return and Adam called his wife's name Eve because she was the mother of all living unto Adam also and unto his wife did the Lord God make coats of skin and clothed them that's William Blake by the way and the Lord God said Behold the man has become as one of us to know good and evil and now lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat and live forever I'll go over this again next week therefore the Guillard God sent him from the forth forth from the Garden of Eden to till the ground from whence he was taken so he drove out the man and he placed at the east of the Garden of Eden cherubims and a flaming sword which turned every way to keep the way of the Tree of Life one more thing and then we'll stop so I thought why in the world so Adam and Eve are tempted by the snake they eat the fruit they wake up they realize they're naked they realize that they're vulnerable they realize the future they realize they're going to die they realize that they have to work it accounts for difficulty in conception and the fall of humankind from unconscious paradise okay that makes sense what about the knowledge of good and evil what in the world does that mean the Mesopotamians believed that human beings were made out of the blood of King knew who was the worst monster the time out who was the goddess of chaos could imagine and then produce so their idea was that whatever was about humanity there was something deeply deeply deeply demonically flawed so that's their conception and then some of that same milieu that these stories emerge so what is opening your eyes and realizing your vulnerability have to do with the knowledge of good and evil really I thought about that I really thought about that I got to tell you I thought about that for like 20 years because I knew there was something there that I could not put together and at the same time I was I was reading things I'm going to tell you something truly awful and so if you need a trigger warning you're you're getting one and believe me I do not give trigger warnings lightly so I'm going to tell you something you will never forget so this is what unit 731 used to do in China and China said Japanese unit during the first second world war right as far as I can tell they did the most horrific things that we're done to anyone during World War two and that's really something so this is what they did they took their prisoners and they would put them in a position so that their arms would freeze solid and then they would take them outside and pour hot water over their arms and then it would repeat that till the flesh came off the bones and they were doing that to investigate the treatment of frostbite for soldiers you can look up unit 731 if you want to have nightmares so that's a unit 731 that's human-beings someone thought that up and then people did it that's knowledge of good and evil here's the here's the key man you know you're vulnerable no other animal knows that you know what hurts you because you're vulnerable now that you know what hurts you you can figure out what hurts someone else and as soon as you know what hurts someone else and you can use that you have the knowledge of good and evil well it's a pretty good trick that the snake code because it doesn't look like it's exactly the sort of thing that we might have wanted if we would have known what the consequence was but as soon as a human being is self conscious and aware of his own nakedness then he has the capacity for evil and that is that's introduced into the world right at that point and here's the rest of the story so there's the snake right and you're some tree dwelling primate and the snake eats you and that sucks so that's like let's watch out for the damn snakes and then you think well wait a minute your brain grows and think wait a minute well there's not just snake there's where snakes live why don't we just get the hell out of the tree and go hunt down the snakes and get rid of them so those are sort of like potential snakes and so the snake becomes potential snake and it's the same circuit that you're using to do this thinking and then you get rid of the damn snakes it's like st. Patrick chases the mug of Ireland no more snakes everything's paradise it's like no no no that's not that's not how it works no well now you've got the human snakes you're a tribe you've got tribal enemies you got to defend yourself against the human snakes right so maybe your empire expands and you get rid of all the human snakes and then what happens well they start to grow developed inside it's like you get rid of all the external enemies and you make a big city and all of a sudden there's enemies that pop up inside because the snake isn't just the snake in the garden and the snake isn't just the possible snake and the snake isn't just the snake that's your enemy the snake is your friend right because your friend can betray you and then it's even worse than that because you can betray you and so even if you get rid of all the outside snakes you've got an inside snake and god only knows what it's up to and that's why the bloody Christians associated the snake in the Garden of Eden with Satan it's unbelievably brilliant because you got to think what's the enemy well it's the snake fair enough but you know that's good if you're a tree dwelling primate but if you're a sophisticated human being you know with six million years of that additional evolution and you're really trying to solve the problem of what it is that's the great enemy of mankind well it's the human propensity for evil right as such well that's the figure of Satan that's what that figure means just like there's a logos that's the truth that speaks order out of chaos at the beginning of time there's an antithetical spirit the hostile brother that's Cain - Abel which we'll talk to talk about next week that's doing exactly the opposite it's motivated by absolutely nothing but malevolence and the willingness to destroy and it has every reason for doing so and that's what's revealed in the next story in Cain and Abel in one paragraph the first glimmerings of that outside of the strange insistence by the Christian mystics let's say on the identity between the snake in the Garden of Eden and the author of all evil himself okay so we only have 15 minutes today I I wanted to finish that so apologies for going over a little longer all right hi dr. Peterson over the last couple weeks and further back you talked a lot about consciousness and the importance of it I was hoping to get your opinion on an issue of consciousness that has often seen Christianity among other groups and politics kind of clashed so I'm hoping to get your views on any consciousness or lack thereof of a human fetus and how that impact or even bortion whatever they are and any legislation thank you thank you okay so the first question is do I have an answer for that that's a good enough answer to actually reveal I know I don't but I can flail about a little bit around it abortion is clearly wrong I don't think anybody debates that you wouldn't recommend that someone that you love have one okay now having clarified that that mere statement doesn't eliminate the complexity of the situation the first question is is should everything wrong be illegal that's a tough question everything that's wrong isn't illegal then there's the additional complication of the difference let's say in gravity regarding the problem in relationship to men and women and we don't know how to deal with that having said that I would say that it's actually the wrong question there's a something Leonard Cohen said once he said that in a massacre there's no decent place to stand and what he meant by that was sometimes you're where there is no good decision left no matter what you do it's wrong so then the question is how did you get there well let's say you're in a position where you are inclined to seek an abortion the question is how did you get there now we have a lot to straighten out about the sexual relationships between men and women in the modern world they're bent and warped and demented out of shape one of the things I see with young people for example is that they will engage in sexual acts with one another that they would not talk about with one another I mean couples will do that for that matter like married couples will do that but they're married that's that's a different story it seems to me that if you are willing to engage in a sexual act with someone with whom you would not discuss that act you probably put the cart before the horse so the discussion regarding the legality of abortion is nested inside a larger discussion about the morality of abortion and that's disconnected inside a larger discussion about the proper place of sexuality and human behavior and to me that's the level at which the problem needs to be addressed now I don't have the answer to that you know because the old answer was get married that was a good answer and it's an answer that people should still listen to but we'll put that aside momentarily I had a client at one point who was I don't know she was probably I'm not I'm going to disguise her in a variety of different ways she was 27 2008 come from a relatively conservative background quite a timid fearful person and also not very well not sophisticated in relationship to relationships and she never had sex what was a bunch of things she'd never done well the answer from me to her wasn't continued to be timid about everything because that wasn't working out for her she needed to go have some adventures now sexual adventures like other adventures are dangerous and so you have to be very careful when you encourage people to go out and have adventures but but but too much timidity and caution also constitutes a pathway to perdition let's say you can't just say to people in the modern world well you know sex till you're married unless you're going to get married when you're very young and perhaps you should I don't know about that but I don't think that we're mature enough as a culture to have a serious discussion about sexual propriety especially in the aftermath of the birth control pill and we seriously need to do that and we have it and so I think the eternal debate about abortion horrible as it is is a it's the surface manifestation of a much deeper problem now I talked a little bit today about the utility of marriage like the spiritual utility of marriage and that's something that I think we're so immaturely cynical as a culture like we don't we're not wise enough to look at an institution like marriage and to really think about what it means and what it signifies it signifies a place that people could tie the ropes of their lives together so that they're stronger it signifies a place where people can tell the truth to one another it signifies a place where sexuality can properly be integrated into life that's no easy that's an easy task it's a place where children at least in principle can be put first and foremost as they should be once they exist and so there's a much broader discussion that has to happen I think before any concentration on the legality of abortion is liable to get anywhere at all that's what it looks like to me so that's the best I can do with that question hi dr. Peterson earlier you showed a picture of Foxy and Noah yeah right uh and and Osiris and in your maps of meaning life yeah you also explained that cultures around the world have these twin snakes yeah they're everywhere man yeah and so you mentioned that you believe this is a representation of DNA you would bring that up to Jesus what is it with you guys tonight huh yeah well yeah no I wouldn't say I believe that I have my suspicions that that might be it yeah because believe is too strong a word but those representations are everywhere and read this book this is a good one oh man now I have to remember the book by an anthropologist who went down to the Amazon jungle and experimented intensively with ayahuasca I think it's called the cosmic serpent I think that's the name of the book you could read that there's another one called breaking open the head which is also pretty damn interesting and there's something to those books I mean the cosmic serpent kind of goes off on a bit of a tangent I would say although breaking open the head is it's better better it seems to stay more constrained and tight but there's we don't know the limits of our perception especially under certain conditions and I think people have had intimations of DNA as the cosmic serpent forever so yeah but that's a like that's way out on the frontiers of my knowledge right like I'm guessing in a dreamlike way when I'm making statements like that so because he didn't mention that you did believe in and that there were sort of maybe some some dreams and interpretations that might have emerged but I don't see how we could perceive DNA as it is right well yes we did we didn't objectively but I'm not so sure we didn't subjectively but it means very strange that these did these double helixes exist in so many places and that they're often utilized as healing symbols with the snake so anyways like I said that's what do you call that I'm it's not hypothesizing it's one thing worse than that speculating those are speculations I'm I'm operating at the edge of my understanding but our perceptions can are very mutable and they can we can see things under some conditions that you wouldn't think that anybody could see so okay yep so I was just starting to have a thought while you're talking about sort of getting to the end of the talk about the snake and the Apple and so on so what you're saying is the moment that that that Adam and Eve eat the Apple they become nervous or whatever so that's awareness of their own vulnerability so then like you said it's also awareness of their own capacity to do harm so it's like when they are eating the Apple then that's them their immediate sort of nervous reaction is is because they ate the Apple and they kind of became evil in that moment or something like that well they woke up and because they they woke up and realized how they could be hurt how they could and would be hurt over the over the over the upcoming overtime it's the same as the discovery of the discovery of your own nakedness and the discovery of time are very very similar phenomena I mean sure as soon as you know how you can be hurt well you know if you are to just consult your evil fantasies it's like what'll really hurt him oh yeah that would work it's like how do you know that well you just think about it what would happen if that happened to me that would hurt oh yeah that'll work it'll hurt him or her and you know you probably think that way twice a week or maybe twice a day Jesus every time you have an argument with someone all you have to do is look at the back of your mind a little bit you don't want to that's for sure but if you do you'll see these sorts of thought process is generating constantly it's like you know in a back-and-forth discussion particularly with people you love it's like you're always looking for a place to put the knife in so it seems really similar to me or seems like they're kind of discovering the kind of like Union shadow within themselves so that that is the moment where it got introduced into the human spirit sure one of the things about the shadow is that it's also when you integrate that that's what makes you a substantial person right oh it's like it seems to me that on one hand well it seems like this tragedy that's Satan the most evil the father of evil whatever has introduced into people but it also seems like without that shadow that people are kind of insubstantial so yeah well right right I mean like I said I said that there's been a multitude of interpretations emerge as a consequence of that story what was God up to what was God in fact evil the initial God like why would he create a snake why would he put it in the garden why would there be these trees what the hell is going on with the whole Satan thing you know it's very very problematic well we'll talk about it more and then this again is let's call it speculation well if you want to make something strong you test it and maybe if you want to make something ultimately strong you test it ultimately and I think that there's an aspect of being that has that element is that human beings are tempted ultimately it's partly because we know good and good and evil now and so that's the landscape in which we exist so you could say the landscape is across its chaos and order and it's good and evil and we're stuck in the middle between those two things it's a very common theme by the way in videogames exactly that chaos order good evil it's the it's the basic plot of endless video games and that's perhaps because it's the basic plot those are the things we have to contend with well I had a vision once shouldn't tell you this but I will anyways I had a vision once that I went to heaven and I was put in a in a Roman amphitheater with Satan just like Thor encountering the Hulk right that's coming up in that New Avengers movie so it was rather a shock because I thought there was a hell of a thing to happen in heaven and so I had this battle and I won and at the end I came up to God and said like you know what's with the whole Roman amphitheater thing there it seemed like it over the top to me said why would you put me in a ring with some one thing like that and he said because I knew you could win and you know I don't know what to make of that haha one thing I should teach you to make of it as I shouldn't tell you but whatever but you know there's something there's something to that in my estimation it's like do you protect the people you love or do you try to make them strong so you think it's that it's not that we have like Satan to thank for making us substantial it's that God gave us Satan in order to make us substantial well I'd hesitate to say that because you know it's so cut and dried but I would say that that there's this that's a strong underlying theme in the biblical narrative yes now it's certainly not the only theme it's not the only interpretation by any stretch of the imagination but there is something there and there's something there you know at the end we didn't talk about this God puts up his flaming sword and these cherubim to keep you away from the tree of life it's like it's see if paradise and immortality are the promised land and what's with the whole flaming angel and sword thing we could have just had the damn fruit five thousand years ago and not bothered with the problem well it seems to me that there's something like I don't know what it is consciousness through tragedy clarity through suffering maybe something like that or maybe the perfection that lurks as a potential in the future is something that has to be earned rather than given maybe it has no value without free choice maybe we have to distinguish between good and evil now that we have the capacity to actually apprehend them maybe that's what life is about maybe that's the separating of the wheat from the chaff see that's the idea in Revelation right because when Christ comes back in the book of Revelation he divides the Damned from the saved and the saved are the people who lived in logos roughly speaking and the Damned or those who don't and so there's this idea that there's this dynamic that underlies experience that is in fact that sorting now I don't know what to make of that at all but that's the story but what I can make of that is that I I can't put a lever underneath the argument that I just made tonight about the relationship between the development of vision the snake of fruit nakedness time the future work and most importantly the emergence of evil that seems to me to be I cannot find a way to undermine that argument it seems I can't break it and that's what I'm always looking for when I'm trying to formulate ideas I'm trying to look for something that no matter how hard I try I cannot break and I can't break that set of ideas now what the full implication is of that set of ideas god only knows right but but I could say also practically you know one of the things that I've observed is that lies and deception destroy people's lives and when they start telling the truth and acting it out things get a lot better gotta stop so I'm going to read you something I get some I had a lot of mail and I don't know where I got this I've been a lot of different places in the last week and this showed up at one of them and I'm going to read it to you I have no idea what to make of it it's written in a female hand so that's about all I can tell but there's no address or name on it this isn't a question but a comment or more accurately perhaps a message I spent this past weekend in an ayahuasca ceremony which for those of you who don't know is a South American visionary plant medicine some of you may roll your eyes at this but ayahuasca brings you into direct contact with the archetypal realm of being users of this medicine initiates I should say refer to ayahuasca as she because the spirit of the plant is decidedly feminine an encounter with ayahuasca is an encounter with the great mother of creation the goddess the void from which all things come the feminine counterpart of logos dr. Peterson you appeared in one of my ayahuasca visions might account for why I've being ripped rather fatigued lately dr. Peterson you appeared in one of my ayahuasca visions and I asked asked her who is Jordan Peterson what is he doing which is something I'd really like to know as well and she responded with crystalline clarity quote here he is here to invoke and initiate the divine masculine principle on earth at this time so I'm up here to thank you deeply and profoundly on behalf of the Great Mother herself to goddess the Divine Feminine principle who has been eagerly awaiting the awakening of the masculine principle into divinity and service so you know get a letter like that every day actually I get a letter to like that every day so you know what went through my head when I read this and this is of course and completely crazy parallel but we know one of the things I learned to do as a psychotherapist was just to tell people who were talking to me what came into my head it isn't what I'm thinking exactly because that's not exactly the same thing you know what comes into your head is more like a dream it comes unbidden it's like your imagination if you're thinking there seems to be like a voluntary element of that right I mean some who god only knows how we think but it seems partly voluntary at least and Jung thought about Carl Jung thought about it like a dialogue between the conscious mind and the unconscious mind there is a constant continual dialogue but when things just pop into your mind it's not much different than walking into a room having something there which is an observation I also derived from Jung by the way because he pointed out quite rightly that people don't really think that thoughts appear to them now you can think because you can take the thoughts that appear to you and then you can subject them to criticism and elaboration and so on instead of just assuming that they're true right off the bat but people often don't do that they just something just pops into their head and then they assume that it's true anyways one of the things that I tend to do in psychotherapy is just to tell people what pops into my head because well why because then the person that is talking to me gets one person's untrammeled opinion not even that reaction not opinion it's not really an opinion I don't think an opinion maybe is what I think later and there's this personal flavor to it what popped into my head was the story about Socrates you know he had this when he was being put on trial by the Athenians for corrupting the nation's youth something I've been accused of by the way although it's not self-evident to me that it's me doing the corrupting he said that somebody had asked him once had asked the Delphic Oracle once and the Delphic Oracle was this retreat that you could go to if you were an ancient Greek citizen and you'd be there and you'd have a dream and then you'd go ask the Delphic Oracle to interpret it and nobody really knows what was up with the Delphic Oracle today how that worked exactly but she would interpret your dream in any case and somebody once asked her who the wisest man in Greece was and the Delphic Oracle said it was Socrates because he knew he didn't know anything that's essentially the story not popped into my mind it's a crazy comparison but you know I have a crazy mind so I guess that's how it works out so now one of the things I'm going to do today which I haven't done before because I'm going to read you a little bit of I told you I finished my book last week and I haven't read it read it to anyone I have given it to a couple of friends to review one person in particular screenwriter named Greg Hurwitz has been unbelievably helpful he's so fast and so sharp at this sort of thing and I can send him like a twenty page dense twenty page manuscript and he'll rip it to shreds and send it back to me in like 90 minutes it's just unbelievable he's so good at that he's been very helpful but I haven't no one else has seen it apart from my editor and I haven't read it to anyone so but some of it seemed particularly appropriate for tonight's lecture so I thought I would start the lecture tonight by reading a little bitter that and it's it's from a chapter it's on the issue of sacrifice as such this is Abraham and Isaac this is a very strange little Testament story right this is one of the stories that's contained in the Old Testament that makes modern people think that maybe we should just not have that punch to do with the Old Testament per say it at all and especially with regards and maybe you shouldn't have anything to do with the God of the Old Testament either because I mean as far as Abraham is concerned God tells him to sacrifice his own son now it turns out that God was just kidding so to speak you know I'm obviously being flippant but you know it does raise the question what do you make of a divine being who would who would require such thing such a thing or conversely what do you make of Abraham who would have such delusions either way it's a little hard on the what would you call modern believability and moral integrity of the Old Testament but these are very very strange stories and they're not what they seem to be or they are but and they're more so we're going to talk a lot about sacrifice tonight and here's some of the things that I've been thinking about sacrifice so this is from this book it's called twelve rules for life an antidote for chaos and it's coming out in January which I think I mentioned and this is from rule 7 which is do what is meaningful not what is expedient and so here's here's some of the writing I've been doing over the last three years on meat on the motif of sacrifice I'll start with just a brief intro before I read this it took me a long time to understand what was meant in the Old Testament by sacrifice and which is strange because once I figured it out it seemed bloody obvious it seemed like oh yo obviously that's what it means but lots of times if you figure something out correctly it seems self-evident as soon as you've figured it out correctly well we'll see how that goes but you know it seemed to work for me anyways I knew that of course at least implicitly I knew of the modern usage of the idea of sacrifice everyone understands that motif is that if you want to make things better in the future then you suck make sacrifices in the present and maybe you even do that multi-generationally in fact you most definitely do if you're a good parent I mean you and that's just I would say that's a really particularly typical of of immigrants right because immigrants often come from terrible places and have to undergo terrible things to come to a new community where they get a rough reception and have a hard time getting their life going and a big part of the reason that they do it is to make their lives of their children better and luckily when they come to Canada usually given where they came from that actually works because where they came from is worse and here is better even though no you know immigrants often have to struggle to to get on their feet again have to learn a new language and become acculturated and face the fact that they're not part of the mainstream culture and well you know many of you know the whole story so the idea that you make sacrifices for the future and you make sacrifices for your children and that's everyone understands without and it's part of being responsible and mature and shouldering the burden of being properly and you do that for yourself too if you're disciplined in fact that's almost what discipline means it discipline means that you're capable of making sacrifices because you're not disciplined if you just do something you want more rather than something that you're doing that's not discipline that's maybe that works and great if your life is working out that way great man but that isn't that isn't discipline this is plan is when you want to do something right now and instead you think no I'm going to force all my gratification maybe forever but certainly for a very long period of time medium to long period of time and you concentrate on something that you think will bear fruit in the medium to long run and so you look into the future and you decide that by making today a little less impulsively pleasurable shall we say you'll make tomorrow a little bit more secure and productive and then you actually do it too and that's difficult you know and we discussed last week Adam and Eve's discovery of the future and and the revelation of the possibility of the future including the possibility of tragedy and suffering in the future and and it's our knowledge of the possibility of tragedy and suffering in the future that motivates us to sacrifice in the present so that we can reduce the unnecessary anxiety and uncertainty and pain that awaits us now that's a negative way of putting it we're also doing it so that you know we can have some joy and we can make life better in all of that and and that's not trivial but the fundamental issue especially once you have small children this fundamental issue is to save the suffering the hell off right that's what you want to do that's your primary moral obligation if you're a person who has any if your eyes are open at all that's your primary obligation and so you make the sacrifices that are necessary and you set up the future and well the the motif of sacrifice is there in the Old Testament but it's more it's so concrete that it's difficult to draw a parallel between the two at least for me they didn't align self-evidently and I don't remember in my rather limited religious education as a child in the United Church because I went to the United Church till I was about 13 I don't ever remember anybody pointing out that like the sacrifices that Cain and Abel were making or the sacrifice that Abraham was supposed to make or sacrifices that people were making to God were the car were the precursors let's say the dramatic precursors to the psychological idea of Accra Feist that we all hold as civilized people in the modern world so although it seems obvious as I said once you lay it out it I don't remember that ever being explained to me but and then well and then let me read this so now that I've sort of introduced it here's what happened as humanity developed first were the endless tens or hundreds of thousands of years prior to the emergence of written history and drama the twin practices of delay and exchange began to emerge slowly and painfully so here's a cool psychological study so it's called the marshmallow test and maybe it's even a reliable study even though it was done by social psychologists it's probably replicable um and it's a nice study so you take small children and you bring them into a room and you put something that they would like in front of them a marshmallow and you then you torture them basically you say see that marshmallow and the kid thinks yeah I see that marshmallow it's like you can have that marshmallow right now or if you wait I think the experiment is ten minutes then you can have two marshmallows and so that puts the child in quite a conundrum because they're being asked to trade an actual concrete tangible marshmallow for two hypothetical future marshmallows and it's not that easy to conjure up a hypothetical future reality that has the same tangible significance as something real right in front of you and so it's amazing thing that people can do that and so then the experimenter leaves and some children grab the marshmallow and just you know chomp that thing down right now other kids they videotape kids while they're waiting and they do all sorts of things they whistle they look at the ceiling they sit on their hands you know they try to distract themselves course they're eyeing that marshmallow like a squirrel lying and not and and trying to restrain themselves and you know what I see in that is that the child's prefrontal cortex the higher cortical systems are warring with the underlying motivational systems more primordial motivational systems that govern such things as Hunger the hunger system hypothalamic system says there is something sweet and fat right sitting there right bloody now grab that thing and stuff it down now and I'm sure many of you have a constant battle with your hypothalamus with regards to sweet and fat things and often lose so you can feel some sympathy for the child but and the hypothalamus has these tremendously powerful tendrils upward into the brain into the parts that we would associate more with voluntary control and the voluntary control centers have these little weak ribbons going down to control the hypothalamus since it's pretty obvious if you know something about neuroanatomy what part is actually in charge when the chips are down and it's not easy for children to learn to regulate those underlying primordial impulses the ones that are wired in the ones that we share with animals but they do it and and and the cool thing is this is what Walter Mischel found he's the guy who did the study was that the long-term outcome for the children who can delay gratification in the marshmallow test is much more positive than it is for the children that are impulsive and eat the marshmallow instantly its delay of gratification now it's likely that that's associated with trait conscientiousness although that specifically has that specific connection has not yet been established but they seem conceptually very very similar so so anyways this emerges and children probably between the ages of 2 and 4 something like that they should have it in place by four because it's very difficult for them to really interact well with other children without having that delay of gratification in place because you can't delay gratification other kids don't like you because you're you want everything your way and you want it now and your lot you're liable to temper tantrums and that sort of thing you haven't got the kind of self-control necessary to make you fun to play with so you can see that emerging in children and it's pretty it's pretty interesting and and not only that if it it predicts positive long-term outcomes just like trade conscientiousness does by the way because trade conscientiousness is the second best predictor of long-term success over the lifespan in Western cultures its second after intelligence and so in our societies the people who do best across time are the people who have high IQs and who work hard and I would say that's a pretty decent what would you call it it's a validation in some sense that our cultures are working properly because what you would want I would say if the system is working meritocratic ly like it should and if you're trying to extract resources from those who can contribute at a higher rate than what you would want to have happen is that the hard-working smart people do better hopefully if that's the case then everyone does better hopefully anyways so you can see this developing in children first where they endless tens or hundreds of thousands of years prior to the emergence of written history and drama the twin practices of delay and exchange began to emerge slowly and painfully then they became represented in metaphorical abstraction as rituals and tales of sacrifice it's as if there's a powerful figure in the sky who's judging you you better keep him happy or look the hell out we've been watching ourselves deal with him for a long time he seems to like it when you give up something you value so practice sharing and sacrificing until you get good at it no one actually said any of this so long ago although they said something very similar but it was implicit in the practice and then in the stories action comes first implicit comes first people watched the successful succeed and the unsuccessful fail for thousands and thousands of years and we thought it over and we drew a conclusion the successful among us sacrifice the successful among us delay gratification a successful among us bargain with the future and then a great idea begins to emerge in ever more articulated form that idea is the point of a long and profound story it's the moral of this story and I'm going to engage in some foreshadowing here what's the difference between the successful and the unsuccessful the successful sacrifice and things get better as the successful practice their sacrifices the question becomes increasingly precise and simultaneously broader what is the greatest possible sacrifice for the greatest possible good you know if you if you push a question in a direction perhaps there comes a time when you can't formulate it any more precisely and broadly and and that that's the point at which the question in some sense and perhaps even the answer the question becomes our katha pollitt it becomes archetypal because it it can't be bested and this is like an ultimate question in some sense how are you going to ask a more broad-based question than that what is given the initial presuppositions that you have to make sacrifices then the logical end point to that is something like okay if you have to make a sacrifice what's the greatest possible sacrifice and for the greatest possible good that's a good question the answer becomes increasingly profound for the god of Western tradition like so many gods requires sacrifice we've already examined why but sometimes he goes even further and requires the sacrifice of what is loved best this is why and this is another one of mankind's fundamental discoveries sometimes things do not go well that that's self-evident but here's the rub sometimes when things are not going well it's precisely that which is most valued that is the cause why it's because the world is revealed through the template of your values if the world you are seeing is not the world you want therefore it's time to examine your values it's time to rid yourself of your current presuppositions there's a famous experiment that I've alluded to a couple of times I believe in this lecture series the invisible gorilla experiment and in the invisible gorilla experiment there's two teams of players each with three members one dressed in block and the other dressed in white and each team is passing a basketball back and forth to the team members and milling about you see a video of them doing so they basically fill the video screen and the White team is passing a basketball to the white team members and the Black team is passing a basketball to the Black team members and your job as as far as the experimenter is concerned is for you to count the number of times that the black block team yes black team passes the basketball back and forth so that's what you do so now you have an ambition and a name and a value and the ambition and the aim and the value they're all the same thing and that is to perform well at the task now the thing that's so cool about this and this is really so cool it's just unbelievably it's just unbelievable that this is the case it's like a complete validation of a certain element of the Buddhist worldview so they passed the ball for a couple of minutes and then the experimenter says to you how many and you say 15 and because you're happy and you're happy with yourself because you've been paying attention and and the experimenter says yeah that's right or maybe not maybe you missed one and then the experimenter says did you see the gorilla and half of you say what what what your real eye like really and he's in the experimenter says yes and then he rewinds it and plays the video and like a minute and a half into the 3-minute video sure enough in walks this guy in a gorilla suit six foot three or so stands in the middle of the game right in the middle of the game the same size as the players perfectly obviously evident the his chest for like a second and a half and then sort of saunters off and half the people who watch the video don't see the gorilla and which is absolutely shocking and what that means is that your ambitions blind you to the nature of reality now they illuminate some reality but they blind you to most of it and that's fine because you're not does not allow to you in some ways you're a very pinpoint thing like a laser beam and so you just can't be attending to everything all the time but one of the things that you might ask yourself once you know that is that if you're suffering dreadfully then one possibility is that you're so fixed on the point you're so fixed on a point the fact that you're so fixed on the point that you're fixed on might be integrally related to why things are going so catastrophic aliy wrong now perhaps not because you know there's a lot of arbitrariness about life and perhaps you suffer even when you don't deserve to that seems to happen in the book of Job for example because job is a good guy and God has a bet with Satan which seems like another relatively nasty thing to do to let's say it just torture and he does quite nicely to see if he'll turn against God and it seems like a rather playground sort of thing for God to engage in but the point is is that even in a document like the Old Testament there's ample suggestion that sometimes people just get wiped out and hurt even if they're living good moral lives aiming properly and all that there's an arbitrariness in life you that's not it erratic low but it's possible that it's what you're clinging to that's hurting you and it's even possible that's the thing that you're clinging to the hardest that's hurting you the most that could easily be someone you love like lots of times I see people in therapy and they're miserable for one reason or another sometimes it's because they have a very close relationship with a family member and that just isn't working you know the family member for the sake of simplicity will say is not really oriented towards helping them have a good life the family member is instead oriented towards making them as bloody miserable as you can possibly make anyone and and what would you say exploiting the the bond between family members in order to enable that and then sometimes the sacrifice that's necessary is either merely distancing yourself from that person sometimes substantively and sometimes seriously distancing yourself from like we don't talk anymore ever and so that's pretty damn rough and it hurts and all of that but but it's a good example of the fact that sometimes in order to extract yourself from the miserable bit of chaos that you happen to be enmeshed in you have to let go of what you love best if the world you are seeing is not the world you want therefore it's time to examine your values that's really worth it's really worth thinking about you know because the alternative to is to curse fate right because if it isn't you and there's nothing you can do to change there isn't something you're doing that's wrong then it's faith itself it's the world itself it's other people let's say because they're a huge part of the world or it's the nature of the world itself or or its God himself in whatever form you either believe in or don't believe in because it's fundamentally all the same in the sort of situation that I'm describing so and one of the things that's really interesting and I mentioned this before about the Israelites in the Old Testament is that they they got this right it's really something because what happens to the Israelites over and over in the Old Testament is that they get all puffed up about how wonderful they are and then they make moral errors because they're arrogant and then God comes along and just cuts them into pieces for like generation after generation and then they wobble back to their feet and but they always maintain the same attitude which is we did something wrong we did something wrong it's like it's like it's like an axiom rather than observation is that if we're not if things are not laying themselves out for us as they should be then we cannot curse god we have to look to ourselves well you think well why not curse God because maybe it's his fault that's a really good question and one of the things that I've tried to figure out over the last 30 years is well why not just curse God because there is this arbitrary element to existence and we are vulnerable and there is a plenty of suffering and things are unfair like there's problems right there's injustice and unfairness and all of these things and endless suffering so why not just lay at the feet of God and the whether God exists or not in some sense by the way with regards to the metaphysics of this particular discussion is not relevant it's the point remains the same either way and the answer is as far as I can tell that if you refuse to take on the responsibility yourself and you attempt it to lay it at the feet of either society or being itself then you instantly start to act in a way that makes everything much worse not only for you but for everyone else and maybe even for being itself and so no it's not helpful now if you're if you decide that it's you you've got the problem maybe that's not even true like maybe you are someone who's being tortured by the bet between God and Satan and like too bad for you if that happens to be the case but it still seems to be the appropriate thing for a human being who's standing on his or her own two feet in a proper manner to take the responsibility on for themselves regardless of the counter-arguments that might be made against it that's really something it's time to rid yourself of your current presuppositions I also think of that it's a deadwood issue you know one of the things you see with motifs like the pair of the Phoenix remember when Harry Potter goes off to fight he's like st. George he goes off to fight the the hell is that thing the basilisk that turns you to stone when you look at it's a dragon for all intents and purposes its guarding a virgin bird what's her name for it's not Virginia it's close to that though Ginny Ginny Ginevra right which is a variant of virgin and very introvert for jigna well when he gets bitten by the dragon and poisoned that's the dragon of chaos right the thing that turns you to stone when you look at it when he gets bitten by it then he's going to die and yeah well if you get bitten by the thing that turns you to stone when you look at it if it bites you man if you're not dead you're going to wish you are it's one of the two and then the Phoenix flies in and cries tears into the wound and that heals them and the Phoenix is the thing that allows the dead wood to burn off occasionally let's say well it's I think it's once every hundred years with the Phoenix and of course it's pretty dramatic the whole damn bird has to go up in flames and then there's nothing left but an egg but there's a very serious message there too which is that you know you can compare yourself in some sense to a forest fire to a forest you know in a forest has to burn now and then for the deadwood to clear so that the forest can actually maintain its continued existence and if you stopped the forest from burning for a prolonged period of time which happened in the United States when they were trying to manage the forest fires too tightly then all that happens is the dead wood accumulates and accumulates and accumulates and accumulates and accumulates until the whole damn forest is dead wood and then lightning hits it and it burns so hot that it burns the topsoil off and then there's nothing left nothing grows and so that's a good moral lesson which is don't wait too long to let the damn dead wood burn off you know maybe a little self-immolation on a daily basis might be preferable to burning yourself all the way down to the bedrock you know once every 20 years or so because maybe there won't be anything left of you when you do that and you know that happens to people all the time I've seen that happen to people many many times the dead wood accumulates the mess around them gathers the chaos that they haven't dealt with accumulates and then one day the spark comes and they burn so far and so fast that there's not enough left of them to recover and then they're the people who've been eaten by the Beast they're they're people who've been eaten by the dragon and now are inside its belly another very common archetypal motif and well maybe a hero will come along and rescue them or maybe they'll just stay in there forever and that's a precursor to the idea of Hell and it's not something I would recommend so a little medicine on a regular basis is a lot better too than total emulation on terms other than your own sporadically it's time to rid yourself of your current presuppositions there's another segment see in the Soviet Union with Solzhenitsyn wrote about the Soviet Union comments pathologies it it's sort of peaked in terms of its pathological authoritarianism when it became illegal to complain that your life wasn't going well and you just think about how horrible that is say because because you know lots of times your life isn't going well I mean and I don't mean this in some casual way I mean maybe I don't know maybe have diabeetus in your you know maybe you're gonna lose your your feet or something like it's really not it's nothing trivial that's going on here something is not good or maybe it's economic or maybe you're unemployed or and but you see the idea in the Soviet Union was well we already have all the answers everything's perfect already that's what totalitarian is fake well if everything is perfect and you're suffering then well maybe there's something wrong with you because everything is perfect after all and if you're suffering then what are you to come out and say well I'm suffering it's like well then your evidence that things aren't perfect right you're like a widow or an orphan in an Old Testament story you know when the Kings got to high and mighty then they wouldn't pay enough attention to the widows and the orphans and then the profit would come along and say you know those widows and orphans a lot more important than you think they are and if you don't pay attention to them properly then things are going to fall apart around you in a way that you just can't even imagine and so well then you're sort of like your own Widow and your own orphan but you don't get say hey look you know things aren't perfect yet because I'm actually having still quite a rough time here you don't get to admit to your own suffering if you can't admit to your own suffering then you certainly see the suffering especially the additional suffering the excess suffering should be treated as evidence that you're not doing something quite right yet it should be treated as evidence that you're wrong there's something important that you're doing that's wrong I understand how harsh that is and I'm not saying that everyone who's suffering is suffering because they're doing something in some simple way that's wrong I was in a elevator once in a hospital it's a very terrifying thing and this person got on who was just in an absolute state of shock you know I mean it was really not good and I don't remember how this happened but I engaged the person in conversation and they just said that they had just had been diagnosed with what looked to be terminal cancer and what was horrifying about it was that what they were doing was going over their life in the elevator trying to figure out what they had done in order to deserve such a fate you know they've immediately taken it on themselves as a moral failing and that's not what I'm saying you can't come up to someone who has cancer and say well if you weren't such a bloody idiot throughout your whole life you wouldn't have cancer and believe me that happens a lot more than you think and people who have diseases like that get blamed for it that's not what I'm saying it's not like that it's it's it's it's a more generalized attitude that is that if life isn't yet what it should be then you have a response you have a primary responsibility to do something about it and the place to start looking is to your own errors and to fix them and that's and that's that's that's a safe bet man because you're probably doing some things that you would wouldn't have to be doing that if you fixed would make things better so it's time to let go and to sacrifice who you are for who you could become there's an old story about how to catch a monkey in case any of you aren't interested in how to catch a monkey now you now you're going to know how to do it first you have to take a large narrow necked jar just large enough in diameter at the top for a monkey to put its hand inside then you have to fill it partway with rocks so it's too heavy for the monkey to carry then you scatter some treats near the jar to attract them and you put some inside inside the narrow neck jar a monkey will come along if you're lucky and grab the you know goodies but he'll want the ones inside the jar too so then put his hand in there and grab what's in there and if you've set up your monkey trap properly then he won't be able to eat his hand out because he's got good goodies not without unclenching his hand not without relinquishing what he already has the monkey coucher can just walk over and just pick up the monkey because the monkey isn't into the whole sacrifice thing because he's just a monkey you know and so you can catch him as a consequence of his own unregulated hypothalamic desires you know and to be what would you say charitable to the monkey if you put out candy or something like that's like how often does a monkey get candy he's probably a little more motivated than you are to not let go but you can get the point the monkey catcher can just walk over to the jar and pick up the monkey the animal will not sacrifice the part for the whole that's actually a pretty good phrase it's the animal that will not sacrifice the part for the whole perhaps this story is apocryphal but as an eccentric psychology professor once told me fiction lies to you in the most truth in the most truthful possible manner something valuable given up ensures future prosperity something valuable sacrificed pleases the Lord those are equivalent statements ones more articulated I would say that's the first statement then the second one is more dramatic and more embedded in a collective religion dream you might say what's most valuable and best sacrifice well obviously that depends on the culture and the time what is at least emblematic of that a choice cut of meat well if you're a herdsmen for example that that's a big deal with I mean generally speaking throughout human history meat has been a very valuable commodity as it is by the way among chimpanzees chimpanzees hunt they like to hunt colobus monkeys and you know they'll they'll basically start eating the damn monkey alive they weigh about 40 pounds despite the fact that the thing is screaming away and that's pretty interesting because one of the things that indicates is that male monkeys that male chimps they're the ones that do the hunting aren't really inhibited that much when they're in hunter mode by what you might describe as empathy and there's certain elements of human behavior that are reminiscent of that you see that sort of thing emerged now and then in human battlefields when groups of men seem to abandon all internal regulation whatsoever to a degree that makes you wonder if internal regulation even exists so it's kind of meat well meats valuable you know and this is a good document by Richard Wrangham I think while back a book about the human invention of fire and I think I told you a little bit about this Wrangham claimed that we invented fire discovered fire mastered it maybe two or three million years ago that's a long time longer than people had thought and that that's what actually transformed us physiologically from our chimp-like ancestors into the sort of svelte creatures we are now because it's a lot easier to digest cooked meat and meat is a tremendous source of of nutrition energy raw materials all of that especially if it's cooked so me it's a big deal cook meat is a big deal and maybe it's a choice cut of meat the kind you might offer to a guest if you're not a I always say this wrong said vegan vegan or vagin I always think vagin but that's wrong that's that's a star vague as a star right they're not like star creatures they're they're yeah anyway so you know you might offer that especially especially if a guest came to your abode and you were I heard man you might sacrifice a high-end animal and offer your guests a nice choice cut of meat and that would actually matter it would mean something from the best animal in a flock what's above even that well in terms of the thing you could sacrifice well your best animal that's good well how about you how about your child how about you well that would be next on the hierarchy it's kind of hard to get past that right and I think it's a it's a toss-up whether the sacrifice is greater if it's you or if it's your child I would say being a parent that it's greater if it's your child because I think most people who have established a I hate I hesitate to say proper but I'm going to anyway it's a proper relationship with their children it's if push came to shove they'd take the bullet and let their kid go live the sacrifice of the mother is exemplified profoundly by Michelangelo's great sculpture the PA de Mary is contemplating her son crucified Andrews so that's his body after he's been crucified it's her fault it was through her he entered the great dream of being so what's the meaning of this sculpture it's a great sculpture it's just an absolutely unbelievable sculpture you just can't believe that someone could exist who could make something like and of course it wasn't the only thing Michelangelo made right it was like that's it it was something he just tossed off in a couple of months while he was doing other unbelievable things but you know it's it's an it's an object of contemplation which is why it's in a great Cathedral in a great city it's an object of contemplation and the idea is something like well what what's the role of a mother if she's awake I had a client come see me a while back not very long ago woman in a boat who's about 30 and trying to make decisions about her life she was pretty career oriented and so I asked her about although maybe having a bit of trouble with career I've seen this many many times so this is an amalgam this is a story that's an amalgam and I talked to her about the other elements of her life it's like well you know there's only five things you do in life so you've got your career down you know what do you do outside of your career that's meaningful and engaging how are things going with your family could be your family of origin your siblings whatever if you have an intimate relationship and like what's your plan for your own family and apart from those five things there's sort of something like get some exercise now and then don't eat too badly and try to stay away from the drugs you know that's that that kind of and the crime that kind of lays out life and if you miss any of those five things or if you do any of those other things wrong then you're in trouble and you can get away with missing a couple of them but not all of them you know and she said something along the lines of well I'm not sure I should bring a child into this world I thought oh God Christ you got to come up with something better than that such a bloody cliche which is what I told her I said you know you must have thought that up when you were 16 it's like really that's here that you can't do any better this is a very very smart woman it's like really and this can't do any better than that like yes obviously this is a vale of tears and you know a well of suffering and all of that you know if you ask 30 people who are wondering about having children why they're wondering 20 of them will say that and so that that tells you how original it is it's not original at all it's not a thought it's like this little it's like a it's like a it's a mean something that lives in your mind it's not a thought and it's certainly not something it's certainly not something that you should just take it face value in and say oh well I'm not having a family then it's like no no you kind of look at that and you criticize it a little bit it's like well the pop it's the other one that's the other one that's very common there's too many people on the planet already I really don't like that statement it's like just who are you going to ask to leave just how are you going to get them to leave you know it's a serious question and who says there's too many people what the hell is wrong with people anyways so or ruining the planet yeah it's like I think it was the Club of Rome who who prophesied by the way that there would be so many people on the planet by the year 2000 that there would be widespread starvation and they were completely and utterly wrong about that and I think it was the Club of Rome who either compared us to a virus or a cancer on the face of the planet it's like oh really that's what you think about people hmm aren't you something isn't that something to think about human beings viruses and cancer what do you do with viruses and cancer invite them in and make them at home it's like no you try to eradicate them you've got a bloody well watch your metaphors folks because it isn't clear that you come up with them or that they run you so you better watch them so anyways Mary you know and Mary's the great mother right that she's the mother that's what Mary is whether she existed or not is not the point she exists at least as a hyper reality she exists as the mother well what's the sacrifice of the mother well that's easy if you're a mother and you if you're a mother who's worth her salt you offer your son to be destroyed by the world that's what you do that's what's going to happen right he's going to be born he's going to suffer he's going to have his trouble in life he's going to have his illnesses he's going to face his failures and catastrophes and he's going to die that's what's going to happen and if you're awake you know that and then you say well perhaps he will live in a way that will justify that and then you try to have that happen and that's what makes you worthy of a statue like that but still the sacrifice of the mother is it right to bring a baby into this terrible world well every woman asks yourself that question some say no and they have the reasons Mary answers yes voluntarily Mary is the archetype of the woman who answers yes to life voluntarily that's what that image means and not because she's blind she knows what's going to happen and so she's the archetypal representation of the woman who says yes to life knowing full well what what life is not naive not someone who got pregnant in the backseat of the 1957 Chevy you know in one in a one night of half-drunk idiocy not that but consciously consciously knowing what's to come and then also allows it to happen because that's another thing that's a testament to the courage of mothers my mother was good at this my mother's a very agreeable person too agreeable for her own good but that's what happens if you're agreeable because you're too agreeable if your own good that's the definition of agreeable and so she's a nice person and it still is luckily she's still alive and we've had a very good relationship and I have always been able to make her laugh which is which is a good thing and but she was tough cookie that woman you know if if remember once she came across I was out playing in this baseball diamond little diamond and empty lot really in this little town I grew up in and I was about ten and she walked by I was there with bunch of my friends and I was about to have a fistfight with this little tough kid that I hung around with and there were half girls on the team and this fight had some relationship to status maneuvering you know in relationship to that anyways we're going to have a fight and my mom walked by she took a look and I could see from her demeanor that she knew exactly what was about to happen and she looked for a second and then she walked by and I thought whoa good work mom no kidding it's like last bloody thing I needed at that moment was for her to come charging up and say you boys aren't planning to have a fight are you it's like well yeah mom we're we were actually planning to have a fight and now that you came and intervened I actually lost before the goddamn saying even started so two thumbs up for mom she was also the person that said because I had some trouble with my dad when I was you know it adolescence he had some trouble with me so you know it was 50/50 that's for now it's probably 70/30 with me on the seventy end of the being the trouble and anyways I left home when I was about seventeen and she said something really interesting when I left home she said it was too good at home you never leave I thought hey mom that's pretty good you know for for an agreeable person you've got a real spine man so that was pretty good so so you know mother that's as this the mother into the person who also says get out there take your goddamn lumps because you're tough enough so that you can handle it she doesn't say you just stay down there and your bedroom brooding away because the world is unfair and treating you badly and your suffering is too much she says yeah there's a lot of suffering out there but you're a hell of a lot tougher than you think you are so in turn Mary's son Christ offers himself to God so completely that his faith and trust in the world is not broken by betrayal torture or death that's the model for the honorable man so you know you have an interesting dynamic there you have the woman who's willing to make the sacrifice lays the groundwork for the son who is willing to make the sacrifice that works out pretty nicely and it's a good thing to know in Christ's case however as he sacrifices himself God his father is simultaneously sacrificing his son right that's one of the oddities of the Trinitarian model is that God sacrifices himself to himself same thing happens in Norse mythology right Norse Zeus Germanic mythology Zeus sacrifices himself to himself he actually hangs on a tree it's actually wounded in his side it's very interesting parallel but I think part of the idea is well the human human race is starting to work out what's the ultimate sacrifice it's something like that ultimate sacrifice of value well the the passion story and I told you I was foreshadowing I'm bringing cysts into consideration things we won't talk about for a long time maybe not at all in this lecture series I don't know because I don't know how far I'll get is that well there's a supreme sacrifice demanded on the part of the mother and there's a supreme sacrifice demanded on the part of the son and there's a supreme sacrifice demanded on the part of the father all at the same time and then that makes the supreme sacrifice possible and hypothetically that's the one that renews that's the sacrifice that renews and redeems it's a hell of an idea man and the thing about it is that I don't know if it's true but I know that its opposite is false and generally the opposite of something that's false is true it's it's opposite as false it's because if the mother doesn't make the sacrifice then you get the horrible eatable situation or something like that in the household which is just its own absolute catastrophic hell and if you want a really good insight into that I would say watch the documentary crumb see ru and be a man that's been rated by some critics as the best documentary ever made and it is some piece of work man it is the only thing I've ever seen that actually lays out the eatable catastrophe and it's full nightmare you know so you could you could look at that so if the maternal sacrifice isn't there then that doesn't work if the paternal sacrifice isn't there you know if you're if the father isn't willing to put his son out into the world let's say to be broken and betrayed and all of those things then that's a non-starter because the kid doesn't grow up and then if the son isn't willing to do that well then who the hell is going to shoulder the responsibility so if those three things don't happen then it's cataclysmic it's chaotic as hell if they do happen is it the opposite of that well you could say well maybe it depends on the degree to which they happen and and it's a continuum how thoroughly can they happen well we don't know you know because you might say how good a job do you do of encouraging your children to live in truth let's say well that's part of the answer to this question and the answer likely is well not you don't do as good a job of it as you could so it works out quite well but you don't know how well it could work if you did it really well or spectacularly well or ultimately well or something like that you don't know and you know people have an intonation of this because one of the things that's really cool about having a young baby this is something you don't know until you have it there's two things you don't know mmm there's a lot more than two there's three things you don't know until you have a baby the one is that you didn't grow up yet because you actually don't grow up until someone else is more important than you you can't so people think they grow up if they don't have children but they don't they just think they do now there are some people who make sacrifices of other sorts but this is a whole different ball of wax as far as I'm concerned it's not a very elegant metaphor but you learn that it's kind of relief relief not to be the center of attention that's cool that you can sit back because of course your child in your family and in societies immediately the center of attention and so unless you're narcissistic then you allow that to happen and then you learn all sorts of really good things about other people because other people really like babies it's so cool I lived in Montreal when we had our first child and I lived in a pretty rough neighborhood by Montreal standards right it's like you know material has such a great city like Toronto it's like even the rough neighborhoods are they're more like charming with a little you know dark underbelly something like that but there were some rough characters in our neighborhood it was pretty poor and we'd we'd push her around in her stroller and he's like grizzled rat dole guys would come by they'd look at her and they just light up and they'd come over and like smile at her and you know you just saw there the positive element of their humanity just well forth you ask there s to be something seriously wrong with you if you don't respond that way to a baby you know I mean this is that that's not good that's not good but it was so cool to see these people you kind of give them generally sort of walk four feet around them on the street you know and yet they were all of a sudden all that the layers that were on them would just fall off and they'd be so and the babies are sort of like public property weirdly enough to sort of like pregnant women you know because people often treat pregnant women sort of like they're public property too I mean in a positive way oh whoa Lord you would have a baby yeah and you know they Hey well they do all sorts of cute things so so you know the reason I'm telling you that is because there's a strong impulse in people to note that there's something miraculous about the existence of a new human being and the miraculous element is all the potential that's there right that's all there is there is potential and with every birth there's the potential for something remarkable to be introduced in the world and you know one of the things I've thought too is the other thing you don't know is that babies are generic until you have one and then your baby isn't a generic baby at all it's like instantly it's a person with whom you have a relationship that's closer perhaps than any relationship that you've ever had and that you can keep perfect right because most of the relationships you've had already are with people who are screwed up in 50 different ways and so are you but here you've got this baby and like it be care but it's not rained yet and so you know you have this possibility of maintaining this relationship that starts out that baby really likes you and generally that continues for quite a long time as there are two years old you come home they're really happy to see it's kind of like having a puppy you know it's like they're thrilled when you come home it's like how many people are thrilled when you come home you know so he'll see you again it's like no not a little kid a little kid is thrilled when you come home and you can keep that going and so there's this pristine element to the potential relationship between parents and children that's terribly devalued in our society terribly it's almost as if we're willfully blind to it and I think it's an absolute catastrophe because there's nothing is very little in life that can compare to establishing a proper relationship with with child they make great company a few if you keep your relationship with them Christine and so you know it's worthwhile you think well I'm so so the reason I'm telling you this is because people look at infants and they think they think this could be the potential savior of mankind that is what they think that's how they act so that's what they think and the thing is it's also true now how true it is I don't know but that's I think probably because I think it's probably because people don't dare to find out that's how it looks to me in Christ's case however as he sacrifices himself God his father is simultaneously sacrificing his son it is for this reason that the Christian sacrificial drama of son and self is archetypal nothing greater can be imagined that's why it's an architect you can't push past it so that's the very definition of archetypal that's the core of what constitutes religious the greatest of all possible sacrifices is self and child of that there can be no doubt pain and suffering define the world of that equally there can be no doubt the person who wants to alleviate suffering who wants to bring about the best of all possible futures who wants to create heaven on earth will therefore sacrifice everything he has to God to life in the truth so that's a page and a half from the book I'm going to release in January so back to Genesis that were all we already up to Genesis four and Adam knew Eve his wife and she conceived and bare Cain and said I have gotten a man from the Lord now this is after Adam and Eve have been chased out of the Garden of Eden right so what's really cool about this I really think that the out of the cain and abel story is the most profound story i've ever read especially given that it's you can tell it in 15 seconds I won't because I tend not to tell stories in 15 seconds as you may have noticed but but you can read the whole thing that quickly and it's so densely packed that I just can't it's it's actually unbelievable to me that it can be that densely packed okay so the first thing is is that Adam and Eve are not the first two human beings can enable are the first two human beings given Adam and Eve were made by God and they were born in paradises like what kind of human beings are those you don't know any human beings like that human beings aren't born in Paradise and made by God human beings are born of other human beings right and so so that's the first thing and it's post-fall we're out in the world world in history now we're not in some archetypal beyond although we are still to some degree not to the degree that was the case with the story of Adam and Eve we've already been thrown out of the garden we're already self-conscious we're already awake we're already covered we're already working we're full-fledged human beings and so you have the first two human beings can enable prototypical human beings so what's cool is that humanity enters history at the end of the story of Adam and Eve and then the archetypal patterns for human behavior are instantaneously presented it's it's it's absolutely mind-boggling and it's not a great it's not a very nice story right so they're they're brothers they're are hostile brothers they've got their their their hands around each other's throat so to speak or at least that's the case in one direction so it's a it's a story the first two human beings engage in a fratricidal struggle that ends in the death of the best one of them that's the story of human beings in history and that man that doesn't give you nightmares you didn't understand the damn story now in in these hostile brother stories which are very very common often the older brother Cain is used and this is very true in the Bible but it's true in all sorts of folktales and all sorts of stories of all sorts for that matter see the older brother has some advantages he's the older brother in a agricultural community the older brother generally inherited the land not the younger brothers and the reason for that was is that well let's say you have like eight sons and you have enough land to support a bit of a family and you divide it among your eight sons then they have eight sons and they divided among the eight sons it's like soon everyone has a little postage stamp that they can stand on and starve to death on and so that just doesn't work so you you you you hand the land down in a piece to the eldest son and that's just how it is it's tough luck for the rest of them but at least they know they're going to have to go and make their own way it's not fair but there's no way of making it fair well so the oldest son has some you might say he has an additional stake in the stability and and the stability of the current hierarchy he has more of a stake in the status quo so that makes a more of an emblematic represent representative of the status quo and perhaps more likely to be blind in its favor it's something like that so that motif creeps up very frequently in the hostile brothers archetypal struggled so Cain fits this the story of Cain and Abel fits this pattern because Cain is the one who won't budge who won't move he's stubborn whereas the younger son who's Abel is often the one who's more not so much of a revolutionary but perhaps more of a balance between the revolutionary and the traditionalist something like that whereas the older son tends to be more traditionalist authoritarian at least in these metaphorical representations an Adam knew Eve his wife and she conceived and bare Cain and said I have gotten a man from the Lord so there's the first human being Cain it's like I told you that the Mesopotamians thought that mankind was made out of the blood of the worst demon that the great goddess of chaos could imagine well the first human being is a murderer and not only a murderer a murder of his own brother and so you know Old Testament that's a hell of a harsh book and you might think well maybe that's a little bit too much to bear and then you might think yeah and maybe it's true too so that's something to think about I mean I human beings you know like they're amazing creatures and to think about us as a plague on the planet is its own kind of bloody catastrophe malevolent low quasi genocide all metaphor but that doesn't mean that we're not without our problems and the fact that this book that sets sits at the cornerstone of our culture would present the first man because a murderer of his brother is something that should really set you back on your heels and again she bear his brother Abel and Abel was a keeper of sheep but Cain was a tiller of the ground there you see a very old representation there's Abel there and he's got his sheep up on the altar and Cain is bringing a sheaf of wheat and I don't know exactly what's happening here with the blood but or it's a ray perhaps it's something like that but the overall impression of the image is that something transcendent is communicating with this sacrifice and you can see that so you think oh how primitive you know how primitive these people were sacrificing to their God it's like you know those people weren't stupid and this is not primitive whatever it is it's not permitted it's sophisticated beyond belief because the idea as I already pointed out is that you could sacrifice something of value and that that would have transcendent utility and that is by no means an unsophisticated idea in fact it might be the great idea that human beings ever came up with it's an answer to the problem that's put forward in the story of Adam and Eve right because we became self conscious and then we discovered the future and then we knew we were going to die and then we knew we were vulnerable and then we became ashamed and then we developed the knowledge of good and evil and then we got thrown out of paradise is like that's a big problem so what the hell are you going to do about it well sacrifice that's the hypothesis well that's a hell of a hypothesis man that's what we're doing you've made plenty of sacrifices even to sit in this theater and many people made plenty of sacrifices to have a theater like this existed many people made sacrifices so that we could actually freely engage in the dialogue that we're engaging in in a theater like this and so it's like all of this is built on sacrifice and sacrifice bloody well better work because we do not have a better idea sacrifice what's the counter position murder and theft so let's go with sacrifice shall we and perhaps we won't consider it so damn primitive you know because it's not so primitive and again she Barrett his brother Abel and Abel was a keeper of sheep and Cain was a tiller of the ground now some people have read into this the eternal battle between herdsmen and agriculturalists it's raged in the American West for example because the herdsmen like to have their herds sheep cattle go wherever they were going to go and of course they had your cultures the farmers like to have things fenced off and so and the agriculturalists actually won in the final analysis but anyways Abel is a keeper of sheep and that's interesting because that makes them a shepherd and I think that's part of the critical issue here because a shepherd I talked a little bit about shepherds before you know if you look at Michelangelo's Statue of David which is another stay during work I mean that David he's no trivial figure and of course David who slays Goliath right and Goliath is like the giant of the patriarchal enemy it's something like that and you know Middle Eastern shepherds they had to keep take care of sheep and they're edible and the Lambs are very vulnerable and there were lots of wild animals around it wasn't like England in the 16th century it was like there were lions you know and you had a slingshot or a stick or some damn thing and so your job was to keep the Sheep organized and not let them eat by the Lions alone and so you had to have a clue and be tough and self-reliant and all of those things had to be tough and self-reliant you had to be able to take care of a lot of vulnerable things at build do it on your own and so that's all built into the Shepherd metaphor and it's you know it's a tough thing for it's not a great metaphor for modern people because we tend to think of the shepherd is someone like little Lord Fauntleroy you know like some little certainly not a lion killing hyper-masculine lion killing you know monster that's not a shepherd the Shepherd sort of dances around and you know it's not that's not the metaphor here that's that's that's not the metaphor here so Abel was a keeper of sheep but Cain was a tiller of the ground and in the process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord okay so he's participating in the sacrificial ritual and Abel he brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof and the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering now you don't know why that is and this is a built-in ambiguity I think now I think there's textual hints but I'm not sure Abel brought the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof okay so so what does that mean well he brought high courts a high quality sacrifice you don't know that Abel's sacrifice is low quality because it doesn't say you know Abel brought God some wilted lettuce and <div class="cue style-scope ytd-transcript-body-renderer active" start-offset="4297980">then burnt it he didn't say that but but there isn't a sentence there that talks about how high-quality Cain sacrifices but in any case the Lord had respect unto Abel and his offering so there's a hint that Abel's putting a little bit more into the whole sacrificial thing than then Cain but there's also a hint that maybe God is just like liking you a little better than he's like in him and that's I think useful from a literary perspective because there is that arbitrariness about life you know with my own children for example one of them has had I would say heat things come easy to him he's lucky fortunate however you want to put it he seems to be that sort of person where's my other child it's like it's just like one horrible job like catastrophe after another and it's so strange to see that because as far as I can tell there's the character logical differences are certainly not accounting for the for the for the difference in destiny you know my want the one child who's had so much trouble I mean as a child was just a wonderful child so mazing ly happy and easy to long with and fun and had a terrible time of it so who knows what God's up to but distributing fate equally certainly isn't one of them and the Lord had respect unto Abel and his offering but unto Cain and his offering he had not respect and Cain was very Roth angry Roth is a tough word you know when these are translated many times it's hard to get the full flavor of the words but Roth and his countenance fell well to have your countenance fell this is sort of up to fall is to to have it be heavy depressed for sure angry for sure resentful probably Roth that's anger so Cain is not a happy clam that his hard work is being rejected by God now that's worth thinking about really because you think about how human that story is you know you're out there well we could say you might be a useless character and you know you're whining about how catastrophic your life is and it's a pretty much obvious to everyone around you and you that it's your fault you just don't try you don't wake up in the morning you don't get a job you don't engage in things you're cynical and you're bitter and you're angry and you don't try to help the people near you and you don't try to fix up your own life and you don't take care of yourself and you know and then things go wrong it's like well really what do you expect but then but that's done I mean that doesn't mean someone in that situation will just say well that's okay I deserve it and they'll be happy about it they won't they'll be absolutely bitter about it and angry but you know put that aside for a moment there are people who seem to struggle very forthrightly let's say and still have one catastrophe after another happened to them and so it's there's no easy answer in this in this it's like you can fall fall afoul of God because your sacrifice is our second rate or you can just fall a fall of God and you don't know why well tough luck for you and then what happens in either case is exactly this almost inevitably Cain was rocked in this countenance fell well you know you meet and I people like this write to me all the time I've seen so many many of them as clients you know they say they're 20 not so often 30 more commonly sometimes 40 their lives haven't gone well you know they're in a pit of despair of one form or another and not only are they in a pit of despair but they're extraordinarily angry about it and god only knows what they would do with that anger if they had the opportunity to give it full voice right you know one of the things I've always thought about Hitler is that you know people you have to admire Hitler that's the thing because he was an organizational genius you know the thing that doesn't stop people from being Hitler the thing people don't people don't refuse the ambition to become Hitler because they don't have the genocide emotive ation they don't follow that pathway because they don't have the organizational genius they've got the damn motivation and you know if you take a hundred people randomly and you talk to them and you really talk to them you'll find that five percent of them would take their vengeful thoughts pretty damn far if they were just given the opportunity and in fact they do because they make life miserable for themselves and often for their family and sometimes for anybody they can come near and then maybe another twenty percent of people have that bubble up in them on a pretty damn regular basis so you know you can have some sympathy for Cain if you don't have any sympathy for Cain then you're not so you can't enable also they don't just represent to our contempo types of being they represent so it's not like you're Cain and you're able in here Cain you're able it's like you're half-and-half and you're half-and-half and you're half-and-half it's something like this this is two different potential patterns of destiny and you don't manifest one purely and the other zero it's like you're it's it's like the line between good and evil that runs down the human heart it's exactly the same idea and maybe you're more like Cain or maybe you're more like Abel but they're still a little Cain in you no matter how able you are and maybe more than a little and probably more than a litter little and if you watch your fantasies which I would very much recommend you'll find that they show you dark things about you that will shock you if you allow yourself to be conscious of what you're thinking so it's a good time when you're having an argument with someone especially someone that you love to just watch the pictures that flash in the back of your mind that's part of let's say coming into contact with what Carl Jung called the shadow and the shadow is the manifestation of Cain that's a perfect way of thinking about it and one of the things that Jung said about the shadow because Jung was not someone you mess around with lightly he said the human shadow has roots that reach all the way to hell and Jung meant that that's no metaphor for him now he might not have meant it in the same way that a fundamentalist Christian from from the southern US might mean it but I would say that young men sit in a way that's far more terrifying and also far more true so and Cain was very wroth and his countenance fell so there's Abel burning is offering away there and he's in this sort of relationship with let's call him the archetypal figure of culture the archetypal father and it's something he respects that's the thing it's an indication that the posture is an indication of respect and then there's Cain in the background you see in his face is in shadow and he's he's jealous of what's happening here and he's going through the motions perhaps and maybe God just doesn't like him we don't know but he's going through the motions and he's not very happy about it and you know that that's actually a phrase that you could you could carve into many people's tombstones as an epitaph for their life which would be went through the motions but wasn't very happy about it this is really an interesting one I think I mean so I don't know what God is doing here exactly but he's helping ignite the sacrificial flame and that's kind of an interesting idea I think because you know let's say that you have an impulse to make a sacrifice you think well I should change this about my life well it's like where does that come from that impulse it's just well just it manifests itself out of nothing so or you came up with it well you might want to stop thinking about that thinking so surely that you come up with your own thoughts you don't come up with your damn dreams do you they just happen Kanade only knows where they come from they come from your brain oh boy that's a sophisticated answer they come from your unconscious well that's not much better at least it's somewhat better but there are those Matan amazing dramas take place in the theater of your imagination at night you don't even understand what they are and yet they occur night after night and those things dreams they can contain wisdom it's just well it just staggers the person who has the dream once they get the key to the dream once they remember it's like oh look you just revealed a bunch of wisdom to yourself that you didn't know well where'd that come from well you don't know how in the world can you dream up things that you don't know that's a tough one maybe we'll talk about that at some point in this lecture series because there are some reasonable things that can be said about that but you know the idea that there's something that's not you young would call it the self Karl you would call it the self which he thought of as the totality of your being across time and space it's something like that and that you know each second that you exist is a slice manifesting itself across time and space and he thought of the the self is partly the voice of conscience whatever that is that helps guide you when you have to make a difficult decision and a difficult decision might be well what do I need to sacrifice what is how do I need to discipline myself right what do I need to forego well how do you figure those things out well you know this picture is trying to put forth the idea that perhaps if you had established the proper relationship with God the Father we've talked about what that might mean then he would help figure out how to get the sacrificial fires burning so that you could stay in a proper relationship with him across time well that's such an unreasonable proposition it what's the alternative proposition well this isn't working out very well that's for sure you know Kate seems to be doing it I don't know what it is it's like it's as if he thinks he can only do it himself or maybe he wants only to take credit for it or something like that he's not in this grateful let's say and inquiring grateful and inquiring posture because that's what a perfect posture should be it should be grateful and inquiring and grateful is thank God things aren't worse for me than they are and you should be grateful about that because they could be a lot worse than they are man they can be so bad and inquiring would be well I don't really know how I could make it better but I'm open to suggestions man if I can figure out how to do it I'll try it that's the in that's the humility and the inquiry that's a humble inquiry how could I make things better it's something like that and that's like what sacrifices do I need to make in order to make things better that's a good question to ask yourself you could ask yourself that every morning what sacrifice do I have to make to make things better you can decide what constitutes better how about that then it's not even as if it's being imposed on you come up with your own notion of what constitutes better you know we try to make it sophisticated should just be better for you cuz that isn't going to work very well right you you're just going to fall downstairs if you do that because you have to live with other people and decide stupid anyways what are you gonna do like can't even nothing you can even say about that it's so that that's the doubts the attitude of a very badly behaved hyper aggressive two-year-old and I mean that technically and so you could you could ask yourself well how I have this day that lays itself out in front of me what thing could I let go of that's impeding my progress that if I let go of would make my life better my family's life better my cultures life better my being better and then that would give you something to do for the day wouldn't it and to justify your miserable life because you need that that's the whole point of the first story of Adam and Eve what do you have a miserable life okay what am I going to do about that well if you just have a miserable life you're just going to suffer stupidly and get bitter about it that's what happens to cain it's like well how about not doing that because that seems to just take a bad deal and make it worse how about making a sacrifice and seeing if you can please God and put being on track god that'd be something to do what could be better than that what could possibly be better than that well that's why it's archetypal man because nothing's better than that that's where it tops out so when you can do that you can do that every day you have to do it a little way because like what good are you you know you're not going to go and bring this socialist utopia into being in one fell swoop you might also think that you know one of the things came might figure out here there's a couple of things that just aren't going right for him downwind of the fire not the right place to blow from and the fact that he's in hand velop tin haze and smoke and breathing it in and the fire isn't burning might be an indication that he's doing something wrong or he could be wiping his eyes and saying Jesus what kind of stupid bloody universe would produce smoke like this it's like yes well that's the more likely outcome and the Lord said unto Cain why art thou wroth and why is thy countenance fallen if thou doest well shalt thou would not be accepted now that's an interesting line because and I've looked at a variety of different translations of this this seventh verse here like a bunch of them because the translation for that that's a critical line and the translation really matters and so I'll tell you what I think the story is but I've been able to figure out and I'm sure I haven't got it completely right but it's so he asks the God says to them if you do well won't you be accepted what is the hint there right it's something like well things aren't going so well for you so the first thing you might think is you're not doing well what does that mean you're not doing good does that not mean you're not acting properly means it's the hint because God is suggesting that if you were doing properly you would be successful I had a friend at one point who was a very bitter person and he had a bunch of problems and some of them were self-inflicted and some of them were fate I suppose and he had he had become very very destructive murderously destructive genocide ly destructive I would say you could see it in his dreams and and he lived with me for a while and I knew him very well he was a friend of mine from the time I was 12 until the time he committed suicide he was spoke 40 and when he lived with me I was trying to help him get on his feet which was why he had come to live with me because he thought maybe I could help him you know on his feet and he could only take relatively low level jobs you know like he had some mechanical ability didn't he didn't get educated although he's a very very smart person he probably had an IQ about 135 or something like that he's very smart and so he was bitter too because he hadn't educated himself to the level that his education select would have demanded so he had to take jobs that were beneath him intellectually and he had a really had that real intellectual arrogance you know because he was smart and really smart people often come to believe that only smart matters and if they're smart and all that and all that matters is smart and then the world is sort of laying itself at their feet then they've been terribly betrayed and and then they cling to their intelligence which is more like a talent or a gift like it's a like it's an idol you know a false idol which is exactly what it is in a very dangerous one and get cynical about the stupidity of the world and the fact that their talents weren't properly recognized and that's just not that helpful you know because smart is a good thing but I'll tell you if you don't use it properly it will devour you just like all arbitrarily assigned talent right so you might have a talent but it's your friend if you use it properly and if you excuse it it will be your enemy and maybe that's how God keeps the cosmic scales adjusted but anyhow my friend was a very smart person although not as smart as he thought he was unfortunately and and but he hadn't done what would have been necessary with that intelligence to make it manifest itself properly in the world and that also embittered him because he also knew that there was more that he could have done if he would have done it and perhaps more that he could still do what I was suggesting to him while he was living with us because he was you know two levels from homeless by that point was that he should find a job that he could find working in a in a garage working in a shop something like that cuz he had some mechanical ability and that he should do he should separate himself from the arrogance that made him presume that such a job would beneath him because at that point no job was beneath him and but more importantly it's not so obvious that jobs are beneath people you know because even if you're a even if the imagine you have a job as a checkout person in a in a grocery store you know it's a fairly unskilled job you can be in some miserable resentful horrid bastard doing that job boy you know you can come in there just exuding resentment bitterness and making fakes and making sure that every customer that passes by you has a slightly worse day than they need to right and and you know pilfering time and perhaps pilfering goods and being resentful about the people who who gave you the position because they're above you in the dominance hierarchy and talking you know bad things gossiping behind the back of your co-workers it's like you can take your menial position self-described and turn that into a very nice little slice of hell that's for sure and you know you go into places like that I always think of the archetypal diner in that way you know you guys have been in this diner there's a really good opposite diner and there's a great video on YouTube it's Tom Waits reading reading a poem by Bukowski and I think it's called Nirvana and it's about a good diner that he happened to visit Bukowski happened to visit when he was on a bus when he was a when he was a kid a diner where everything was going well and you could listen to that it's great I think it's great but this is the opposite diner I'm thinking wow so you go into a diner right it's seven o'clock in the morning and you order some bacon and eggs and some toast and then you look around in the diner and you think it was like 1975 when the windows were last washed and there's this kind of thick coating of who gives a damn grease on the on the walls you know and and the floor too has got that sort of stickiness that you really have to work out to develop over years you know and the waitress is she's not happy to be there and the guy behind the counter isn't happy that that happens to be the waitress that he's working with and then you know you walk down the stairs maybe to the washroom and that's its own little trip so you come back and you order your damn eggs and you order your toast in the order your bacon and then it comes and like the eggs are too cooked on the bottom so they're kind of brown and then they're kind of raw on top and and they're cold in the middle which is you really have to work the cooking egg like that man but you can master that with like ten years of bitterness you teach how to cook an egg like that and then the toast here's what you do with the toast right you put you take you take the white bread you know the pre sliced stuff that no one should ever eat then you put that in the toaster and you overcook it and then you wait and then you pop it out of the toaster and then because it's overcooked you scrape it off and you knock off the crumb so it doesn't look too burnt and then you wait till it's cold and then you put cold margarine on it because if you put cold first of all not butter but if you put cold margarine or you can also kind of tear holes in it so that then it has lumps of margarine in it and it's really dry except where it's too greasy so that's like your own little work of art man and then you put that on the side with the with the with the eggs and then you have the potatoes and this is how you cook the potatoes properly you know so they're leftover potatoes and you keep dumping new leftover potatoes into the old leftover potatoes over weeks and so some of the potatoes have they're no longer potatoes right they've have returned to mother earth huh then you flop them on the grill and you sort of hide it oh you burn them a bit I guess and then you've slapped them on the plate and Jesus you don't eat those man that's for sure and that's the point and then you have the bacon and you want to make sure you buy the lowest possible quality bacon not such let's how you start and then you throw it on the grill and you don't your grill has to be overheated to do this you have to cook the bacon so that it's raw in places and burnt in other places and it has that delightful picked like odor that only really cheap badly cooked bacon can provide or may we use those little breakfast sausages that no one in their bloody right mind would let within 15 feet of anything living you know and then you serve that right and you serve it with the kind of orange juice that is only orange in color and then with coffee that's ah what would you say it was started too early in the morning that's the first thing bad quality coffee started too early in the morning got cold once or twice and has been reheated and then you serve that with whitener like here's your breakfast it's like no man that's not breakfast that's hell no and and you created it and then what you do if you have a diner like that is because you have a miserable life if you have a diner like that and you've really worked on achieving that is every night you go home and you curse your wife and you curse your kids and you fucking well cursed God too for producing a universe where a diner like yours is allowed to exist and that's your bloody life so also that's what God is trying to point out here is if thou doest well shalt thou not be accepted and if thou doest not well then sin lies at your door well so what I looked at lots of translations for this and actually the next line is and unto these unto thee shall be his desire yes what God actually says is something like this is like you know things aren't going so well for you but if you were behaving properly they would but instead this is what you've done sin came to your door and sin means to you know pull your arrow back and to miss the target sin came to your door but he uses a metaphor and the metaphor is something like sin came to your door like this sexually aroused cat predator thing and you invited it in first and then you let it have its way with you it's like you entered into a creative uses of sexual metaphor he entered into a creative exchange with it and gave birth to something as a consequence and that what you gave birth to you that that's your life and and you knew it you're self conscious after all you knew you were doing this and you conspired with this thing to produce the situation that you're in young said something about this similar about the eatable mother situation sorry it was very politically incorrect what he said of course every single thing he wrote was politically incorrect so just how you could tell he was a thinker by the way he talked about the unholy alliance between hyper dependent children and their mothers and he said well it's actually because you probably thought about it as a as a maternal thing I'm not putting Freud down because Freud mapped out the oedipal situation brilliantly I'm not putting 4i down but you know Jung was taking the ideas and expanding them outward and you know he said that there was an actually an unholy alliance between a hyper dependent child and a and they need to pull over dependent mother and the Alliance was the mother would always offer so maybe the kid is supposed to go off and do something that would require a little bit of courage and effort and the mother says well are you sure you're feeling well enough to do it and then the child could say yes or the child could say no and then you know be put in bed and maybe didn't all of that and but the thing is the child made the damn decision too and you might think well that's pretty harsh but just because children are little doesn't mean they're stupid and you don't know children if you don't know how children know how to manipulate because they are staggeringly good at that because they're studying you non-stop trying to figure out what you're up to and be how they can get what they want in the way that they wanted and so they can play a manipulative game no problem especially if they're well schooled in it and so it's sort of like that it's like maybe the mother is a little too a little timid and a little inclined to overprotect and maybe the child is a little manipulative and a little willing to not take that courageous step out in the world and to regress into infantile dependency instead and then you get a terrible dynamic building across time that is like a vicious circle you know or like a positive feedback loop that just expands and expands and expands because sometimes in families you see a hyper dependent child and a perfectly independent child in same mother so obviously same there I mean mother's very complex and mother for child a and mother for child B are not the same mother even if they happen to be the same human being that literature is quite clear on that but you get my point but God's idea was not only are you not doing well because you're not doing well but you're not doing well because you've actually really spent a lot of work figuring out how to not do well this is like creative effort on your part and if you read about truly malevolent people and you could start with the Columbine killers because they left some very interesting Diaries behind so I would recommend them if you there plenty of serial killers you could read about in the people who've really gone out and done dark things and I've read more than my fair share of that sort of thing and understand it quite well if you really want to have your countenance fall and be Roth ten years of brooding on your own catastrophe sort of a loan and letting your fantasies take shape and endi and egging them on and and allowing them to flourish and let's say take possession of you because that's exactly the right way to think of it that will get you somewhere like this and there are more people who are like that than you think and you're more like that than you think well so Kayne he's obviously not very happy about this whole answer obviously because the last thing you want to hear if your life is turned into a catastrophe and you take God to task for creating a universe where that sort of thing was allowed is that it's your own damn fault and you should straighten up and fly right so to speak and you shouldn't be complaining about the nature of being but that is the answer he gets and so then what happens well we have to infer that if Kane was angry before that he's a lot more angry now and of course that's exactly what the story reveals and Cain talked with Abel his brother and it came to pass when they were in the field that Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew him I'm going to read you something else now this is foreshadowing again this is from the same chapter by the way do what is meaningful not what is expedient Jesus was led into the wilderness according to the story to be tempted by the devil Matthew 4:1 prior to his crucifixion this is the story of Cain restated abstractly Cain is far from happy as we have seen he's working hard or so he thinks but God is not pleased meanwhile Abel is dancing away in the daisies his crops flourish women love him first of all he's a pretty good guy everyone oh is it he deserves his good fortune all the more reason to hate him I used to joke when I used to teach at Harvard and now and then my wife would have some of the undergraduates over we used to joke afterwards because some of them were many of them were very remarkable kids you know like they they were super smart they were athletic or they had some dramatic ability or they were musicians or they done some spectacular charitable work because he basically to get accepted into Harvard you had to be top of your damn school and then you had to have at least two other outstanding things going for you you know and what was so annoying about most of these kids this was our joke with you really both liked them and respected them it's like we my joke was do you think they would have had the good graces to be like dislikeable sons of bitches at least with all the all those other great things going for them they had to act like respectability and like ability to it as well so you thought well you know it really couldn't happen to a better person it's like good god well that's that's that's able situation you know it's like and you know the funny thing too is that that's an ideal that's the ideal right because an ideal person let's say would be someone who you would want to be like and and someone who is operating in the world like you would want to operate and someone whom fortune was smiling on and someone who is making the right sacrifices it's really what you would want to be and so can kill that right so it's a psychological story too and you see this in the cynicism that people have about people who have done well in the world they're always looking for some reason why they've done well they must be crooked or they must be they must be conniving or they must be arrogant or they must be psychopathic or you know and of course all of those things exist but it's a very bad trick to play on yourself to make the proposition that the person in the world who represents your own ideal is that ideal because of despicable reasons because what you do is train yourself that the ideal that you should pursue can only exist if it's motivated by despicable reasons and then what not only is able your brother dad as your brother in the field in reality but you've also slaughtered your own ideal well then what the hell are you going to work for well how are you gonna live then well bitterly and miserably that's for sure bitterly miserably and hopelessly that's how you're going to live you know it's so rare that I see especially publicly that people honestly admit with sports figures they'll do it that's that's one place where that seems to happen but it's so uncommon for expressions of admiration and gratitude to manifest themselves in any public communication of any sort newspapers TV YouTube Twitter it's almost always undermining and backbiting and criticism and very often directed to people who who have often done little else but bring good things into the world for other people and that's part of why this is such a profound story he's a pretty good guy everyone knows that he deserves his good fortune all the more reason to hate him that's for sure Kane broods on his misfortune like a vulture on an egg he enters the desert wilderness of his own mind he obsesses over his ill fortune and betrayal he nourishes his resentment he indulges in ever more elaborate fantasies of revenge his arrogance grows to Luciferian proportions I'm ill used and oppressed he thinks this is a stupid bloody planet it can go to hell and with that he encounters Satan in the wilderness and falls prey to his temptations and he does what he can in john milton's unforgettable words to confound the race of mankind in the first route and mingle and involve earth with hell done all despite the Great Creator he turns to evil to obtain what good forbade him and he does it voluntarily self consciously and with MELAS let him who has ears here so that's the first two human beings the resentful bitter failure taking an axe to the admirable success then the Lord said unto Cain where is Abel thy brother and he said I know not am I my brother's keeper and he said what hast thou done the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground now art thou cursed from the earth which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand you know if you want to understand that which I would recommend you could read Dostoyevsky's crime and punishment that's a great it's a great novel I think it might be the greatest novel ever written because I haven't read every novel but in my experience it's the greatest novel and it is exactly this it it says what happens psychologically if you commit the ultimate crime it's amazing it's absolutely amazing it's it's it's there's there's no psychologist like Dostoyevsky we now tell us the ground it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth and Cain said unto the Lord my punishment is greater than I can bear now one of the things that's interesting about this is that you know it I think the punishment that God lays on Cain is it's like the inevitable consequences of Cain's action it's something like that it's like well he killed his brother there's no going back from that man like good luck forgiving yourself for that especially if he was an ideal especially if he was your ideal because he haven't just killed your brother and of course tortured your parents and the rest of your family you've deprived the community of someone who is upstanding and you did it for the worst possible motivations it's like there's no up from there right that's that's as close to hell as you could manage on earth I would say and Kane said unto the Lord my punishment is greater than I can bear behold thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth and from thy face shall I be hid doubt to is like there's also no turning back to God let's say after an error like that because well you've done everything you possibly could to spite God assuming he exists and the probability that you're going to be able to mend that relationship in your now broken state when you couldn't mend it to begin with before you did something so terrible starts to move towards zero and it shall come to pass that everyone that findeth me shall slay me and the Lord said unto him there for whosoever slayeth Cain vengeance shall be taken on him Sevenfold and the Lord said a mark upon Cain lest any finding him should kill him that's an interesting thing I wanted about that for a long time because you might think well why would God take Cain under his wing so to speak given what's already happened and I think it has something to do with the emergence of the idea that it was necessary to prevent tit-for-tat revenge slayings it's something like that you know and and there's hints of that later in the text because you know it's like well I kill your brother and then you kill two of my brothers and then I kill your whole family and then you kill my whole town and then I kill your whole country and then we blow up the world it's like yeah that's probably not a very intelligent solution to the initial problem even though the initial problem which might be a murder is not an easy thing to solve but I think it's something like that and then the last part of the story is God's William Blake so Adam and Eve have discovered their dead son and Cain has become cognizant I would say of what he did and what he is right so it's another entrance into a form of self-consciousness it's it's you know the self-consciousness that Adam and Eve developed was painful enough they become aware of their own vulnerability in their nakedness and perhaps even their capacity for evil but Cain becomes aware of his voluntary engagement with evil itself and sees that as a crucial human capability and that's something modern people you know it's no wonder we don't take it seriously like I know in the Academy and among intellectual circles for decades the idea of evil has been it's like what are you medieval or something you know the whole idea of evil you don't that's a non-starter as an intellectual starting place as a as a topic and that's something that I've just been unable to understand because I cannot understand how you could possibly have more than a cursory knowledge of the history of the 20th century much much less a deep knowledge of the history of the 20th century and to walk away with any other conclusion then well good might not exist but evil hey the evidence for that is so overwhelming that that only willful blindness could possibly explain denying in its existence and that was actually a useful discovery for me because I also concluded perhaps that if it was true evil existed then it it was true by inference that its opposite existed because the opposite of evil let's say the evil of the concentration camp let's say or we could get more specific about it we could say there's this one thing that used to happen in our switz where they would take people off the incoming trains those who lived you know that weren't stacked around the outside of the train train cars and you know froze to death because it was too cold you know those who only had to be stuck in the middle where it was warm enough so that maybe the old people died because they suffocated but at least some of them were alive when they made it to our sweats and then they took those poor people out one of the tricks that the guards used to play on them was to have the the newly arrived prisoners hoist like hundred pound sacks of wet salt and carried them from one side of the compound and these compounds were big this was a city it wasn't like a gymnasium it was like a city there were tens of thousands of people there they'd have them carry the sack of wet salt from one side of the compound to the other and then back right and that was to make a mockery out of the notion that work would set you free it's like no no you work here but there's nothing productive about it the whole point it's exactly the opposite of sacrifice in some sense it's oh we're going to make you act out working but all it will do is speed your demise and maybe we can decorate it up a little bit because not only will it speed up your demise it will do it in a very painful way while simultaneously increasing the probability that other people's demises will be painful and sped up it's a work of arts that's for sure and to to know about that sort of thing and not to not regard it as evil means well you can figure out what it means for yourself and Cain went out from the presence of the Lord and dwelt in the Land of Nod on the East of Eden and Cain knew his wife and she conceived you know and one of the critics the criticisms are fairly common criticism of these biblical stories is well if Cain and Abel were the only two people and from Adam and Eve it's like where did all these other people come from and doesn't that make the story like simple-minded it's like no that makes the reader simple-minded you know I mean really that's the best criticism of this you're going to come up with I mean absolutely missed the point that that would be the right response you missed the point and Cain knew his wife and she conceived and bare Enoch and he builded the city and so it's Cain that builds the cities and starts the civilization and called that's pretty rough too right so it's the first fratricidal murderer who builds the cities after the name of his son Enoch and unto Enoch was born around etc etc going through the generations and Lamech took unto Him two wives the name of the one without on the name of the other Zillah this is a an attempt to flesh out the genealogy and to describe how culture started in some sense in these tribal communities and ADA bear jebel and he was the father of such as dwell in tents and of such as have cattle and his brother's name was Jubal and he was the father of all such handle the harp and organ and Zilla she also bear tubal-cain an instructor of error every artificer in brass and iron tubal-cain traditionally is the first person who makes weapons of war and Lamech back to Lamech a descendant of Cain said unto his wives Adah and Zillah hear my voice he wise of Lamech hearken unto my speech for I have slain a man to my wounding and a young man to my hurt if Cain be Avenged Sevenfold truly Lamech seventy and Sevenfold well what I see and that is this proclivity of this murderous capacity of Cain as it manifests itself as society develops to to a murderous intent that transcends the mirror killing of a brother you hurt me I hurt you back no you heard me I kill you in six other people and the thing that happens after that is to not make it seven people but to make it seventy people and so there's this idea that once that that first murderous seed is sown it has this proclivity to manifest itself exponentially and that's a warning and that's also why I think tubal Cain who's one of Cain's descendants was the first person who made weapons of war and that's pretty much the story of Cain and Abel and it's a hell of a story as far as I can tell and I think it's worth thinking about pretty much forever because there's so many so many it has so many facets you know and I think the most usefully revealing of those facets is the the potential for the story once understood to shed light on not your own failure not even on your rejection by being let's say but by the but on the proclivity to murder the best and the best in you for revenge upon that violation because what that means and we know that knowledge of good and evil into the world so to speak with Adam and Eve's transgression is that now not only does humanity have to contend with tragedy and suffering and even the unharvested fruits of proper sacrifice but with the introduction of real malevolence into the world so there's the fall into history and then there's the discovery of sacrifice as a medication for the fall and then there's a counter position which is the emergence of malevolence as the enemy of proper sacrifice and that's where we're left at the end of Cain and Abel and that's the end of that lecture thank alright ok so you said that one of your moral axioms is that pain is bad and so we should work to eliminate unnecessary suffering isn't this the basis for a secular morality like utilitarianism and can we therefore be moral without religion well I don't think that its first of all probably to the first question but that's also that derivation is predicated on the idea that that's the only idea you know that I'm putting forward as a ethical idea and it's not if that was the only idea well then you could derive from that a fairly straightforward brand of utility utilitarianism but that also I think to push the argument in that direction also necessitates the reduction of what might constitute pain to something to uni-dimensional because I think suffering is better term than pain although pain in some sense is at the core of suffering suffering is a multi-dimensional phenomena and I don't think that you can draw a simple utilitarian argument from that either the existence of suffering or the observation that it's the reduction of unnecessary suffering might be a good thing so I'm also leery of those see it's not reasonable in some sense to reduce a complex set of ideas to a single proposition and then say the ideas that I've been putting forward and then to reduce another complex philosophical set of ideas to a single proposition and then say aren't those two things the same and they are to reduce them to the two simple axioms or you could argue that they're the same but but you but I would say there's a tremendous amount left out in the telling and that what's left out is relevant it kind of reminds me of those those philosophical games that psychologists often play it's like well if there was I think when I what's the one I don't know if I can recall this properly it's the trolley cart problem something like you know if there was a train that was out of control and it was going towards six people on one track when you flip a switch so it's switched tracks and only killed one person would you do that and I read a question like that I think that's a stupid question and the reason I think that is because you can't take a situation like that and render it properly by reducing it to that question and then you also can't assume that the person who answers that question would in fact act in the way they answered you can't presume any of that it's like because in a situation like that in a high-stress situation like that the devil is in the details and I've dealt with situations like that a number of times and know perfectly well that the Devils in the detail so I think that there's a there's an intellectual reduction to make a philosophical point that doesn't give the complexity of the topic justice and then there's a second part to that which was and therefore can't we be moral without religion well I would say that question also suffers in some sense from the same problem of formulation I I'm very hesitant ever to answer a question of the form is a merely a manifestation of B when a and B are very complex things because the answer that is it depends on what you mean by moral and what you mean by religious because you see there's an underlying intellectual maneuver in in a question like that and the underlying maneuver is the a priori assumption that something as complex as religion or as complex as morality can be reduced to an object with a name and that then two objects reduced to the name can be assessed simultaneously and I don't think that that's the case I think you can say something like is a triangle a square I think you can say that but I don't think you can say is it possible to have morality without religion I don't think you can have that question because it it has to be expanded out so it's like what do you mean by morality exactly and what do you mean by religion because maybe and maybe not and so and so the answer to that question is to decompose the question I don't want my young children indoctrinated with dangerous ideas and as time marches on I trust public education less and less I know that you have strong thoughts on the danger of the devouring oedipal mother who harms your child by protecting them and that's certainly not what I aspire to I wonder if in spite of your idea that kids need to become tough and learn to slay dragons if you have anything good to say about the idea of homeschooling well I don't have anything bad to say about it I do know that the Quebec government has recently taken moves to make it much more difficult for people to homeschool their children and it's not like five years I mean 15 years ago I would have presumed that the vast majority of people who were homeschooling their children were to be viewed with skepticism initially I'm not so sure about that anymore you know for example I was sent a poster today someone sent me this link that they found in the local junior high school and one of the media pieces that were recommended on this poster was a movie called Hedwig and the Angry Inch now I thought that was a terrible movie even though I'm perfectly capable of enjoying bizarre movies but so it's a bizarre movie that's for sure but I also thought it was a terrible bitter movie terrible and bitter those are separate a movie can be bitter and be quite great but it was a terrible movie and it was a bitter movie but I can tell you one bloody thing about that movie it's not required viewing for twelve-year-old kids that's for sure so I think you have increasing reason to be skeptical of the public education system I also looked at the Elementary Teachers Federation of Ontario's guidelines for education from kindergarten to grade 8 and what that is in essence and I think I will do a video about it in the relatively near future is a blueprint for transforming children into social justice warriors it basically says that it's like you don't have to be a conspiracy theory to read that I mean we have social justice tribunals in Ontario and so the idea is well if you're going to get your children if you're going to get people to what would you say favor equity properly well then you better start teaching them well they're young it's like maybe not so now you you ask that question properly because you say well the terrible education system the wonderful mother homeschooling right that's the danger it's like no because it might not be the wonderful mother homeschooling it might be the pathological mother using the pathology of the education system as a excuse to get her talons into her children right because that's certainly equally possible or perhaps even more possible because at least in the public education system there's some necessity for consensus so to have something that you have to be very aware of and work to prevent right and so I would say if you're going to do that probably best not to do it on your own and you need it's like you need a Board of Advisors or something like that and so maybe it can't just be you and you have to figure out well what what is the aim and how are you going to manage that and what makes you think you can do it even if it's being done badly publicly what makes you think you could do it better I mean my general advice is and people have asked me this in fact I had a conversation with the guy who was Tyler my backyard this morning about something his son had said to him that he was taught at school recently which really made the Tyler who had come from a rather authoritarian country step back on his heels and think I'm not so sure I should be sending my kid to public school anymore and maybe I shouldn't be living in Toronto even you know but my general advice is keep an eye on your kids and discuss with them what they're learning and and help equip them with the tools to not only to articulate their own viewpoint in response to what they're being taught now if the problem is you might not have the time nor the ability to do that that's no simple thing and increasingly if you're unwilling to have your children participate in what is increasingly indoctrination and not education thanks to in no small part to the Ontario Institute of Studies on education which is an institution that I particularly despise because I think that all it does is almost all it does now is produce indoctrinate errs of children it's not an easy it's not an easily easy problem to solve so more more power to you wanting to put your children in a situation where they're not being indoctrinated but the alternative is very very complicated and difficult so yeah likely you know I would say generally speaking there's a shamanic basis to to almost all the religious traditions because that's the milieu out of which the religious traditions emerge now I can't say much more than that because I don't know and no one does that the particularity mean you might say well is there an allusion to the ingestion of psychoactive chemicals in the Adam and Eve story and people have made that case and there's been powerful cases made so there's a book for example I think it's called soma by a guy named Gordon Wausau who was the first person an amateur mycologist who was the first person to propose that the soma of the Hindus was we're at Amanita muscaria mushrooms which is actually a those are the the red mushrooms with the white dots that you always see on fairytales you know the cute ones toadstools flies like to eat them they're called fly agaric also and why seem to like getting stoned I know that's weird I know that's weird thing to say but there's I have a good book on animal use of psychedelics and more animals use them than you might think but anyways there is some evidence that you know of use of of the injecting of fruits let's say metaphorically speaking as an aid to the transformation of consciousness that goes back so far that well forever as far as human beings are concerned but to specifically tie that to the Adam and Eve story I haven't been able to see any evidence that would definitely link them you know there's there's been a lot of interesting books written about that there's one that was quite a kind of a weird hit and I think in the early late 60s might have been early 70s sort of got brushed off as a hippie book but it really wasn't it's called the sacred mushroom in the cross absolutely that's the sort of book you read you think huh I don't know what to do about that I have no idea what to do about that look so that's all I can say about that yep my questions about martyrdom so um what do you think martyrdom or the willingness to suffer and die for what you believe if anything says of the conviction and what do you think is the benefit for the martyr which is at least traditionally immaterial and transcendent good compared to the regular sacrifice or practical sacrifice which is ordered to the Future material psychological or economic good man you guys really come up with some wicked questions I think it depends to some degree on how you define martyrdom you know because you could you could define it as the tendency to pathologically self aggrandizing self on public display or you could say it's the decision to be immovable about a set of principles right so let's go with that one forget about the first one well I wouldn't recommend it to anyone right in some sense it's it's that's a really tough one people ask me I'll make it personal I suppose people asked me when I first got involved in saw this political controversy back in September October well they asked me a couple of things they they asked me if this was the hill that I really would choose to die on us like pronouns and the transgender issue yeah well it's not what about one I would have picked and but I mean it was about language you know and that that makes it non-trivial I mean bill C 16 was passed this week as you know and one of the things that was quite interesting about that I will answer your question was that brenda Cosman who was the woman that I debated I think it's one of the persons that I debated didn't like to be referred to as a woman but I don't didn't think it was Brenda anyways she wrote an op-ed and I believe it was in The Globe and Mail but it might have been the National Post saying as I knew she would say that bill C 16 was just the beginning that we have plenty of work left to do and yes you can bloody well be sure that we have plenty of work left to do anyways I was asked during that period of time whether or not I was being a martyr you know and I thought well it's not really one of my ambitions you know it's like that's sort of torn to the Lions thing doesn't sound like exactly something you might aim for but I think well sometimes you find out in your life maybe that there's something you won't do and one thing and then maybe you just don't do it no matter what the consequence is maybe I don't know because you know I haven't been pushed to that point but there have been people who have been pushed to that point in history and they basically said I don't care what you do to me I'm not doing that and you know maybe some of them were suicidal and some of them were psychotic and some of them had whatever other problems that people might have but yeah I do have this suspicion now and then that some of them were just kind of serious about and saying no and there's some utility in being serious about saying no and it that sort of revealed itself to me I suppose to some degree back in September we and I read a piece of legislation that said I would have to use some words that were legislated by the government and I thought there's no goddamn way I'm going to do that under any conditions that I can imagine now there are conditions and I have a pretty good imagination for unimaginable conditions I couldn't see it because I thought that if I did that I would break through whatever would be left of me after having done that would no longer be me and I'm not interested in that I know what that would be like I actually do know what that would be like and I'm not interested in that I would rather have whatever else happens happen and people have said to me well you're so courageous for taking this stand it's like yeah well I'm not going to claim any sort of other world courage I can tell you that but I can tell but one thing I do know the difference between these different forms of hell let's put it that way and there's the hell that maybe I might be dragged through if I don't agree don't act in accordance with this law and there's the hell that I would be dragged through if I did act in accordance with the law and I would vastly prefer the first hell to the second and isn't clear to me that that actually constitutes courage is it useful because that's also the question about martyrdom I think it's very useful for people to see that someone will say there's no way there's no conceivable way that you can get me to do that and and I've thought long and hard about such things too because i've taught very many people to negotiate and one of the things I always teach them is you don't negotiate from a position of weakness because you lose and so if I say no to something and I mean no I mean no I bloody well won't do it and I think that if there are people who also agree that such things aren't appropriate to have the example of someone who says no and means it actually turns out to be useful and so then I would say well that's an inclination in the potential direction of martyrdom and but I don't see how to distinguish that that from actually just having the courage of your convictions and so sometimes you might say well a person who has sufficient courage in their convictions will sometimes be put to death well if that's the definition of a martyr then sometimes but not all of all ways that's a really good thing and one of the things I really liked about Solzhenitsyn's book The Gulag Archipelago which is an I refer to it often it's an absolutely staggering book is that he put in many many stories of people who were in the gulag and they were often religious believers which was a shock to him because he was an atheistic communist when when he first entered the camp's they were often religious believers and they were people who said no there were things they would not do they would not participate in what the regime was asking them to do and he you have to read it because the Devils in the stories write the details in the stories but Solzhenitsyn in the camps grew to have tremendous admiration for such people and actually viewed them as exemplars of the mode of being that was necessary for him to escape both the communist propaganda that had shaped him as an individual and also the terrible bitterness and sorrow and anger that he experienced as a consequence of being flung into the terrible concentration camp conditions of the gulag archipelago so yep hey Doc thanks for staying alive and potentially saving humanity yeah that's good stuff I'm wondering about a couple of things firstly who won that childhood fight you kind of let that let that just slide so I'm thinking it's a big L well I can tell you because he was a tough little kid see I don't remember what happened but my remembrance of him was that he could eat pound meal pretty pretty effectively so yeah yeah his name was Vernon switchin ik yeah he was really the good friend of mine and and I think I think Vernon still lives in Fairview so if if he hears of this then maybe he'll remember that too and and know you know so probably he would have won I didn't win that many physical fights when I was a kid so that's not the only question okay anyway cool I'm not sure if you if you've actually been asked us before I've missed the last two lectures but I wondering what your thoughts are on polkan jr. Tolkien and his work not just Lord of the Rings but the similar alien which is basically like I'm seeing all this and I'm thinking it's like the modern Bible in a way it's got the weird names like to Paul Cain and all that stuff and and specifically when we were talking about Cain just now and how he was thing just moving and he was talking about how he felt like betrayed by God and you any misspent his whole life working it to spite him essentially and he kind of set the path for for the darkness in humanity yeah that's almost exactly Melkor which was in the similar alien basically what's what spawned everything evil in Middle Earth and Mordor and whatnot and I don't even know I won't be welcome talking with a student of mythology and you know the the the the story of The Hobbit is a retelling of Beowulf in large part and that's a dragon slaying myth and and so the the the reason the Tolkien and rolling for that are so popular is because they've done a very good job of making the old myths new and and well look what's happened with the Marvel series it's the same thing and with Star Wars and all of that is that you can't not respond to these stories now you're going to find them in one form or another and sometimes well with the biblical stories for example the mythological the meaning of the mythological content has become invisible that's partly the death of God that Nietzsche was referring to but that doesn't mean that the stories themselves vanish because people have an eternal hunger for them now the problem with them emerging in let's say more literary or less sophisticated form let's take the Marvel movies as an example is that they're not surrounded by an articulated culture the same way the biblical stories are so for example they're not surrounded by something like Paradise Lost by John Milton which or or Dante's Inferno which are works of unlimited depth and so you throw away something of great value and reacquire it in a different place with less value perhaps but more comprehensibility it's not it's not a great trade that is not a critique of Tolkien it's not a critique of anybody who's drawing on mythological stories for their narratives you have to do that to be a good storyteller but it's nice to go as close to the source as you can as well so yeah and the overlaps that you described well yeah it's exactly what you'd expect because if you deal with great mythological themes you start to get the archetypes are at the bottom of stories and so if the story goes down far enough it runs into the archetypes and that well that was Jung's claim and I think he got that exactly right so last one there's a passage in Paradise Lost where the demons are building pandemonium under Mammon's sort of guidance and they crack open the it's not really earth but hell and they take out the gold and they build pandemonium which is the most sophisticated architectural wonder of all time in Milton's language and and this this conception of taking material and turning it into a temple to oneself was interpreted by Humphrey Jennings who was the founder of the mass observation movement if anyone saw the opening to the britons 2012 games the history of the Industrial Revolution he said was encapsulated by this passage in Milton where you have demons building a temple for themselves out of matter and that mankind in Milton's language was was taught to do this or that they learned it first by this example and says let not envy that Devils have riches in hell and I see things in this one the the Gnostic idea that somehow the world itself that we inhabit is hell ultimate that matter is not our true places of existence but somewhere is sort of platonic and also the toasty and sort of bargain that people made around 1666 to to get a world of stuff and seeing some possession by losing a soul yeah but existed before that and I wonder if that I play with that a lot in my own thought and I wonder if that's something that you found in Milton and what you think of that passage in particular well Milton was definitely a prophetic voice right and I think that's that's a perfectly reasonable retelling of that section it's also very much akin to the story of the Tower of Babel we'll talk about next week see the problem with the problem god it's so complicated see what one of the things that Jung said about the transformation of the first millennium of Christianity into let's say the second millennium of Christianity was that Christianity had promised something like Redemption Universal Redemption from suffering maybe in the afterlife but that was kind of a cop-out let's say because it didn't really solve the problem of suffering here and now and you believe that as people had although although it did many it did many positive things let's not let's not forget that it civilized people in a way that they hadn't been before or you could make that case but then there was this underground at the same time there's this denial of the utility of material reality that went along with the spiritualization of mankind in that in that first in the Christian millennium there was value left in material because it had been ignored and so then Jung believed that the the collective unconscious broadly speaking began to be attracted to the to what had been rejected by the hyper spiritualization and started to question whether or not additional value could be extracted from the material may be as a adjunct to the spiritual because maybe true redemption was something like a proper meeting of the spiritual in the material which wasn't something that seemed to be part and parcel of Christian Christian doctrine up to that point now maybe what Milton was warning against was a swing to far right and I think Milton's point is well-taken because one of the things that's worth noting is that you can be perfectly miserable in a house of gold right I mean I've known very many wealthy people very very wealthy people and the problem see the thing is is that money just doesn't solve that many problems that people have people wish it would people who want to be rich think it will and the people who want to redistribute money think it will and I know that there's nothing to be said for abject poverty but the problem is is that there are many see Arius problems that human beings have that matter material comfort alone does nothing to address or almost nothing you can be perfectly you can have a perfectly miserable family life and twenty million dollars and the buffer that the twenty million dollars puts between you and the misery is it sometimes it's not even a buffer it's a magnifier so melding would warn against the creation of even the idea of a material utopia even in principle something Dostoevsky also recognized as an error you cannot solve the problem in that manner and maybe the demonic idea is that is propaganda that you could now maybe maybe there is a balance of some sort because I don't understand if we were going to build the City of God let's say well a huge part of the endeavor would have to be spiritual and to me that a huge part of that would be it would have to be something predicated if not on truth at least not at least on the willingness of people not to lie to one another without that all the material well-being in the world is it's a facade it's like gilding a corpse right and I think that's partly what Melton was warning against I mean Melton was doing many more things than he knew of course because he was a poetic genius of incalculable genius right right right right so well you've obviously thought about such things very much so that was a very good question so alright everyone goodnight you so I'm going to launch right into it I like this story as well this is the story of Noah and the flood and then the Tower of Babel which I think are juxtaposed very interestingly the Tower of Babel is one of those stories like Cain and Abel that's only a few lines long it's like a fragment in some sense although the story of Noah is quite a well-developed narrative but like the other stories that we've covered it is relevant at multiple levels of analysis simultaneously and so what I'm going to do to begin with is to start with some background information so some psychological background information so that the story makes sense and the first thing that I'd like to I'd like to make a case for is that the you're bringing to bear on the world an a priori perceptual structure and that's really an embodied structure and it's a consequence of the three and a half billion years that you've spent putting your body together which is a tremendous amount of time not only your body but your mind of course because your mind is part of your body and very much embedded within it you know you tend to think that you have your brain in your head and it's sort of splitting separate from the rest of your body but it's not really true your tremendous massive system of neurons running through your entire body autonomic small neurons in the autonomic nervous system then are on the central nervous system so that's a lot of neurons and then your central nervous system of course enables you to exercise voluntary control over your musculature and also to receive information from it your brain is really distributed through your body one of the things you may not know is that people who are paraplegic can walk if you if you suspend them above a treadmill their legs will walk by themselves with no voluntary control so your spine is capable of quite complex activity in fact when you walk mostly it's a controlled fall and mostly your spine is doing it and so so anyways the point of all that is that you don't have a blank slate consciousness that's interpreting a world that manifests itself as sacred gated objects in some straightforward sense you have a built in interpretive system that's extraordinarily deeply embedded and invisible because you might think about it as the implicit structure of your unconscious it's it what it's what gives rise to your conscious experience and and it presents you with the world that that's one way of thinking about it and it's a good way of thinking about it the psychoanalytic way of thinking about it as well as the neuroscientific way of thinking about it because one of the things that's pretty interesting about modern neuroscientists especially the top-rate ones and those are usually the ones that are working on emotions as far as I've been able to tell are are often quite enamored of the psychoanalyst Jacques panksepp was a good example of that because they came to understand that the psychoanalyst insistence on underlying unconscious personified motivations was actually an accurate reflection of how the brain worked so to think of yourself as a loose collection of autonomous spirits it's governed by some overarching identity is a reasonable way of thinking about it the question is or a question arises from that is what is the nature of this a priori structure that you use to interpret the world and I think the clearest answer to that is that it's a story and you live inside the story and that's very very interesting to me because I believe I have a couple of videos that lay this out I believe that Darwinian presuppositions are at least as fundamental as Newtonian presuppositions I actually think they're more fundamental and that the fact that we've evolved story-like structures through which to interpret the world indicates to me that there's something deeply true about story like structure they're true at least insofar as the fact that we've developed them means that here we are living and that it's taken three and a half billion years to develop them there they're highly functional and so we don't have much better definition of truth than highly functional you know that that's about as good as it gets partly because we're limited creatures and we don't have on the siient knowledge and so the best we can do with our knowledge generally speaking is to know its functionality and improve it when it fails to work properly I think the scientific method actually does that and so the fact that we've evolved a story like structure through which to interpret the world that's pretty damn interesting it says something fundamental about stories and it's it's strange in the same way that the fact that we have hemispheric specialization for the known and the unknown or for chaos and order order and chaos Ori respectively also says something fundamental about the nature of the world if you assume that you know we've evolved to reflect the structure of the world broadly speaking that's obviously not just the physical structure the atoms and the molecules but all of the patterned manifestations of the physical molecules as they build structures of increasing complexity across time that would include human interactions and all of and political interactions and economic act interactions Familia interactions all of those things that are a very important part of our reality but perhaps in some sense not as fundamental as the physical attributes that the physicists concentrate on so we live in stories and also I want to talk to you a little bit about stories and about their structure because when you understand a little bit about the structure of stories then a whole array of things about mythology all of a sudden make overwhelming Sampson so useful because what you see is that many of the things that are standard occurrences in your life everyone's like them are portrayed universally in mythology and it's very helpful because first of all it D it D isolates you one of the things you learn as a clinical psychologist contre the anti psychiatrists let's say is that diagnosis is often a relief to people you know there's a problem with being diagnosed because then you might be labeled and then the label can follow you for the rest of your life and once you're labeled as something then strange things happen around you that so often reinforce that label maybe you start acting it out more or you dot it as an identity but there's a flip side of that which is that the last thing that you ever want to hear when you go see a physician or psychologist is you know I've never seen a case like yours before right that is not a relief man because if the message is I've never heard anything like what you're telling me the outcome is either going to be not so good for you or you're not going to get listened to it all right because you're such an anomaly that you're you're actually your existence is annoying to the integrated knowledge structure of the medical professional that you're attempting to receive advice from well it's definitely the case because they you know if you can be put in a box then the Box tells the doctor what to do with you and that's actually a relief to the doctor but also a relief to you right because you want to know so you come and you say look I can't go out of my house much anymore I'm afraid on elevators I have heart palpitations as I sometimes they end up in the emergency room increasingly my interactions in the world are restricted I find myself staying at home afraid I'm going to died of a heart attack and the psychologist says well you have a agoraphobia it's like lots of people have that and here is usually how it develops and here's the treatment course and you know we can probably do something about that and it's like well you're not going to die of a heart attack now probably that's a real relief you're not crazy in a completely unique way and you're crazy in a way that might be treatable you know and it's such a relief because people come in there with a pile of snakes of indeterminate magnitude and they walk out with one manageable snake and it's still a snake but you know one manageable snake beats a Hydra right so all right so so back back to stories so the stories that that we tell and that we live in are fundamentally ways that we deal with the complexity of the world and the fundamental problem with the world as far as I can tell is that not only is it complex beyond your comprehension but the complexity shifts in unpredictable ways so that's the Darwinian conundrum actually that's why Darwinism seems to be a practical necessity with regards to the continuation of life because because the complexity changes unpredictably you can't necessarily tell what's going to work in the future and so the Darwinian process solves that by generating quasi random variations and letting whichever one by happenstance happens to work in that environment survive now it's not random precisely because the underlying structure is conserved it's very rare that a child would be born with an extra arm or something like that and like the skeletal structure that you inhabit is shared by animals going way way back in evolutionary history there's a lot of conservation and in the evolutionary process but so there's variation within conservation like music it's a good it's a good way of thinking about it so the the story that we tell have exactly the same structure they have this is core element with variations and so alright I'll turn to the stories and so the first problem as I mentioned is come a complexity problem things are just too complicated to get a handle on and that actually has serious consequences because what happens to everyone eventually is that their lives become so complicated that they die so and that and many terrible things can happen you on the way to dying as well that are complex complexity related right you can develop a serious illness that you can't get a handle on you can hit a what would you call an impasse in your relationship that you cannot get past and see no way out of that happens to people quite frequently people who are suicidal for example they often feel like they've been backed into a corner that know that they have no options they have no good options no matter which way they turn there's something terrible to face and they can't see any way out of it and sometimes that's more true than you'd like to think because we also tend to like to think that people's problems are primarily psychological but they're not now that's one thing you learn quite rapidly as a clinician is that most of the time people don't come to you because they have mental illness they come to you because they have a complexity management problem their lives have got out of hand on them and they don't know how to get them back under control and so all sorts of things can do that and then of course that can make you anxious or depressed it can trigger all sorts of illnesses but the fundamental problem is still that things have got beyond you and that actually has a psychophysiological cost that isn't merely psychological you have a limited amount of capacity from from from a resource perspective to deal with emergent complexity it just is just not enough of you you just you'll exhaust your psychophysiological resources if you get into a situation that's too complex well that's what that's what the idea of chaos represents it represents that underlying complexity that can manifest itself at any time and it can manifest itself for example if you're if you wake up in the morning and you know you feel an ache of some sort and perhaps it's nothing and you ignore it but it gets worse and you end up going to a hospital and you find out perhaps for example that you have pancreatic cancer and you're going to live for six months and that's the end of that and so it's it's it's it's at that moment that you break through the thin ice that everyone walks on and you see what's underneath and what's underneath is the in eradicable complexity of life and that's chaos and that's now it's taken people a long long time to get a grip on this conceptual what would you call conceptual schema and and human beings have done it mostly with image and story before they've been able to do it in any particulate matter and so there are a set of images that represent this underlying chaos and one of them is the dragon of chaos that that precisely that and that's the dragon that the hero goes out to confront that's the symbol of the unknown it's the thing that lurks underneath it's the thing that also guards treasure because I'm me unknown there's possibility also the water that that was there we talked about in the Mesopotamian creation myth the water that's there at the beginning both the salt and the fresh water is often a symbol of pre cosmogonic chaos often people have dreams for example some of you had this dream I suspect you'll dream that you're in a house that you know well and all of a sudden you discover a new room or a set of new rooms or maybe a set of rooms in the basement and often the rooms are not well organized and they're full of water those are very common things and what that means is that you've broken through the constraints of your conscious self understanding to a new domain of possibility but a new domain that needs a tremendous amount of work it says well here the new part of you but it's not well developed there's it's flooded it's flooded with chaos essentially and it's water I think partly because chaos is not only what you fall into when you're not expecting it but it's also the unknown that you confront forthrightly and generate new things out of and water is a symbol of life especially in the desert and of course water life is dependent on water and so water is a natural symbol to utilize when you're talking about something that's life-giving but also potentially deadly because a little bit of water well that's a drink but a lot of water that's a shipwreck right and so and those are the those are the extremes now there are accounts that are sort of sub texts in Genesis and they all swear in the Old Testament of God conquering a great monster Leviathan or or Bama that has these sort of serpent Isle elements and making the world at the consequence of that conflict so there's this idea that the world creating force which we've talked about as the logos is the thing that continually confronts chaos and that one way of thinking about chaos is as a predatory reptilian monster and often one that lives in the depths are perhaps underwater and part of that I think is because we actually use our predator detection circuit to do this sort of pre cognitive process and so that the notion fundamentally is anything that threatens you instantaneously is something that your predator detection circuit should be working with it's fast its its spout it's low resolution it doesn't have a lot of ideas but it's really really fast and that also accounts for capability and tendency to very rapidly treat people who upset our conceptual structures as enemies of the predatory variety we can fall into that in no time flat because it's it's the archetype if something comes along to knock you for a loop it's a shark it's something that lurks under the water it's something that will pull you down it's an enemy and and you should get prepared and that's a reasonable defensive strategy even though it also has its dangers and can sometimes be wrong so the landscape within which we have to erect our stories it's fundamentally one of an overarching chaos a chaos that exceeds our capacity to comprehend in any sense individually familial socially economically we're always threatened by the collapse of the structures that we inhabit constantly we have to work well it's like you own a house you know how much times has been maintaining a house well a lot and why is that is because the house falls apart because you're stupid and the house falls apart well because you do repairs wrong or you ignore things right and I'm saying this actually for technical reasons the house falls apart because you're incompetent but even if you're confident the house falls apart right it's just entropy and so things have a proclivity to fall apart on their own so you just have to run like mad just to keep them doing what they're supposed to be doing and then of course that is conflict by your own willful blindness and inadequacy as a repair person refusal to attend and all those other things so so that's a very classic idea which will return to one of the ideas that Mircea Eliade a a famous history of religions extracted from a very large corpus of flood myths was the idea that the earth is periodically flooded for two reasons one is things fall apart just entropy the straight entropy it's I don't remember which law of thermodynamics that is but it's one of the big laws of thermodynamics it's one of the top three man things fall apart of their own accord and that's one of the things that we have to contend with and then the rate at which things fall apart is sped by the sins of men that's the other idea and you know that everyone knows that because you know you know your car breaks down in the highway you thank god that's so inconvenient and then you you know you shake your fist at the sky and then there's part of you in the back your mind that goes God you know I knew that rattle that I wasn't paying attention to actually signified something you know and I knew I should have paid attention to it and I didn't and now I'm in the situation that I'm in now and you know I know I bet you this happens to people two or three times a week is they do something stupid that they know they shouldn't have done that they told themselves not to do mere seconds before and they know the boy says don't do that yeah yeah you do it you can get nailed for it exactly the way that you knew you would get nailed for it and then you're hurt doubly because not only did it fall apart but you're the idiot that made it fall apart knowing full well that was going to fall apart and ignoring it and so that's the idea behind the notion that there are two reasons that things fall apart thermodynamic entropy and the proclivity of people not to attend to things they know they should attend to and partly we do that because if a problem emerges it always announces itself unless it's a really really tiny problem and you're approaching it voluntary voluntarily it always announces itself with negative emotion and that's part of the predator detection circuit it announces itself in frustration or disappointment or emotional pain or grief or the paramount one anxiety and and no wonder because it's a problem right and the logical one the logical response is it's just sort of freeze in the face of the problem but of course if it's a problem that has to be addressed and solved freezing it and turning away from it is not a good solution because since things tend to fall apart on their own accord if you just leave the thing alone that's problematic it's just going to get worse not better which is one of the things that's very annoying about life so for example you know if you get a warning message from the tax department the probability that ignoring that will make it go away is zero right what will happen instead is that the more you ignore it the larger it will grow and if you ignore it long enough then it will turn into something large enough to eat you and that will be the end of you I read in Harper's Magazine at one point that people would rather be mugged than audited and so I believe that because the mugging man that's over it's like a couple of minutes a sheer terror lost your wallet the way you walk the audit that's like that's like a semi fatal disease so so that's chaos now it's the idea here to is that that's the chaos that's the psychological idea is that that's also the chaos that whatever is being represented in genesis as the Spirit of God extracts order out of at the beginning of time and it's also that which we're constantly contending with as we struggle in the same manner to construct and maintain habitable worlds so it's brilliant it's brilliant you know when I first put together the relationship between what Iliad II called the pre cosmogonic chaos and the predator predatory landscape that surrounded our ancestors and the manner in which were structured neurologically to respond to all of that I thought it was it was like an amazing epiphany because it's self-evidently the case that the world is too complicated for us to deal with and that's one of the problems that we face on an ongoing basis and then the question is well what do you do about that and if you ignore it it gets worse so Laurene it doesn't work and so we know what doesn't work and so if ignoring it doesn't work then attending to it might work and then I found out with the Egyptians for example that Horus was the god of the tension and the same thing happened among the Mesopotamians with far duck and his ring of eyes it's like what's the way to forestall the catastrophe of things falling apart and the answer to that is by attending to them voluntarily attending to them and that slots very nicely into the hero mythology that promotes the idea that if there's a dragon in the whereabouts in in the near in the neighborhood let's say that hiding in the basement just makes it grow larger it's time to go out and confront the damn thing and the general stories are as well you might get killed because it's a dragon but it's only might as opposed to definitely will get killed if it happens to attack you at 3 in the morning at home when you're hungover and it's been a bad day and you don't have your you know art your sword and your shield at the ready which is generally what happens to people who avoid things so it's not something that should be recommended you're screwed both ways that's one of the things that's so nice about being deeply pessimistic it's so freeing because one of the things well it's very frequent it's such a relief and it's really a useful habit to develop is sometimes no matter what you do you're in trouble and that's a relief because then you can stop scrabbling around for the way out there's no way out man it's like you can pick murder you know wretched death a or slightly less wretched death be something like that and and I know that's a terrible way of looking at things but it is extraordinarily useful to understand that many times you get your choice boils down to picking the least bad option and if that's all you can do if that's what how life is revealing itself to you it's like well more power to you the least bad option that's the best you can do and and and it's good enough especially compared to the alternative which is the most bad option so all right now so the fundamental reality of things is complexity beyond comprehension and then the question is well how is it that you manage that and partly you manage that and this is where the image of the patriarchal order comes in in the positive manner I might point out because in the absence of patriarchal structure for lack of a better lexicon there's nothing but chaos and I wouldn't recommend chaos because it's it there's a lot of it and there isn't that much of you and if you think you can handle it without an a priori structure and without a sociological structure surrounding you then you don't know anything at all about human beings because one of the things I've noticed for example is that it's it's unbelievable the degree to which our sanity depends on a functioning sociological structure and here's why well first of all you kind of need to know what to do every day you have to have a routine because you're an animal you know on you know if you have a dog or a cat dogs are really good example this dogs like routine they like to be walked the number of times a day that they're supposed to be walked and they get quite sick very rapidly if you don't if you don't routinize they're they're days children are exactly the same way now you can overdo it right but still you know you need to know approximately when you should get up should be approximately the same every day you need to know approximately you're going when you're going to eat you need to know what you're going to eat you need to know who you're going to eat with you need to know where to buy your food it's like 80% of your life 70% of your life something like that consists of those things that you do every single day that you repeat and those are often the things that people think about as the trivial elements of their life but one of the things I would like to point out to you if you do the mathematics I did this with a client of mine who was having hard time putting his child to bed they were having a fight every night and I knew by that time the studies indicate that most parents only spend 20 minutes per day of one-on-one time with their child now the reason for that is that people are busy and it's actually not that easy to parse out 20 minutes of one-on-one time it's a lot bloody more time than you think but that's all there is 20 minutes he is spending like 40 minutes a day fighting with this kid trying to get the kid to go to bed and that's not very entertaining you know you think was just having a scrap with the Keita both going to bed but it's no no no no if it happens every day it's a catastrophe so you do the math so we'll say five hours a week for the sake of argument just to keep it simple it's 20 hours a month it's 240 hours a year that's six 40-hour work weeks that guy was basically spending a month and a half of work weeks doing absolutely nothing but having a wretched time fighting with his son trying to get him to go to bed horrible right that's just way too much time to spend doing something like that if you want to actually have a positive relationship with someone because it's just too it's just too punishing and so well so you need structure you need predictability and you need more of it than you think just to keep you saying now if you're lucky and and maybe a bit odd you can deviate 5% from the norm or 10% from the norm or something like that carefully and cautiously as long as the rest of you is all well ordered in a normative manner you might be able to get away with that and you might be able to sustain it across time and people might be able to tolerate you if you do it or maybe you'll get really lucky and you happen to be creative but reasonably well put together and people will actually be happy that there's something idiosyncratic and unique about you but even under those circumstances mostly what you want is to have a routine it's discipline its predictable and bloody well stick to it you're going to be way healthier and happier and saner if you do that and then the other thing that you need because this is one of the things the psychoanalyst thought wrong I think is that they overestimated the degree to which sanity was a consequence of internal being properly structured internally you know because from the psychoanalytic point of view you're sort of an ego and that ego is inside you of course it rests on an unconscious structure but the purpose of psychoanalysis is to sort out that unconscious structure and the ego on top of it and to make you a fully an autonomous individual but there's a problem with that because the reason that you're saying as a fully functional and on Thomas human being isn't because you've organized your psyche even though that's important the reason that you're saying if you're a wit if you have a well organized unconscious an ego is because other people can tolerate having you around for reasonably extensive periods of time and will cuff you across the back of the head every time you do something so stupid that people will dislike you permanently if you continue and so what people are doing to each other all the time just non-stop is broadcasting sanity signals back and forth right it's like you smile at people if they're well if they're not not only behaving properly but behaving in a way that you would like to see them continue to behave you frown at them if they're not you ignore them if they're not you shun them you you roll your eyes at them you manifest a disgust face you don't listen to them you interrupt them you won't cooperate with them you won't compete with them it's like you're blasting signals at other people about how to regulate their behavior so frequently well it just makes up all of your social interaction that's why we face each other and we have emotional displays on our face and we're looking at each other's eyes and we know exactly we know as much as we can about what's going on with each other given that we don't have immediate access to the contents of their consciousness and so partly what you're doing with your routine is establishing yourself as a credible reliable trustworthy potentially interesting human being who isn't going to do anything too erratic at any moment and everyone else is around there tapping you into shape making sure that that's exactly what you are and that's how you stay sane and so what happens to people too if they don't have a routine and they get isolated as they start to drift and they drift badly because the world is too complicated for you to keep it organized all by yourself you just cannot do it so a lot of our so we outsource the problem of sanity and it's very intelligent that we outsource the problem of sanity because sanity is an impossibly complex problem and so the way that we manage the incredibly complex we have a very large number of brains working simultaneously on the problem all the time it's like a stock market for sanity and it's partly I use that I use that definition with purpose because the stock market does the same kind of impossible thing right because it tries to price things which is impossible there's how many things are there like a billion how in the world do you decide what the price is you can't decide what the price is that's why you have a stock market as well in the free market I mean for for consumer goods is everyone's voting on what the price of everything is all the time that's the way we figure it out because it's actually it's technically impossible that's partly why the stock market explodes now and then and there's bubbles and all that sort of thing but anyways the point is things are chaotic in Ellis in Wonderland when Ellis goes down the rabbit hole that's the underworld right so now she's gone into the sub structure of being and she meets the Red Queen and the Red Queen is mother nature and mother nature is running around yelling off with her heads off with their heads which is of course what mother nature does and she tailed Ellis in my kingdom you have to run as fast as you can just to stay in the same place and that's exactly right and that's a description of in fact evolutionary biologists I call just picked up on that phrase they call it the Red Queen problem and the Red Queen problem is everything's after you all the time and you're not smart enough to do anything about it Ord enough about and so that's a permanent existential problem so how do you deal with that you've got a biological structure so your embodiment is part of the solution to the problem and then your enculturated and because you're enculturated you're taught a lot of things that you need to know but mostly what you're taught is how to communicate with other people in an acceptable manner and then once you can communicate with people in an acceptable manner then you can outsource your problems constantly but you're doing constantly and so we're in this continual dynamic exchange of problem-solving so if you're a socialized person that's what you get access to and that's something to know if you're going to have kids and I mentioned I think in a previous lecture the PERT the purpose of being a parent for very young children is to make your children exceptionally socially desirable by the age of four because if you can do that they're set because everyone wants them around and as soon as everybody wants them around they want to play with them they want to cooperate when they want to compete with them it's like the door is open the door is open and they stay saying because they've got all sorts of people who actually like them that are helping them out and so that's your goal is to make them as socially acceptable as you possibly can socially desirable as you possibly can and that doesn't mean you render them obedient without spirit right that's that's a tyrants motive of enforcing social acceptability it's like never do anything wrong well that's not any way to I mean that's a good piece of advice you know like but it's missing the other half which is do a bunch of things that are right so that so that people are thrilled to have you around and to and encourage that that's what you want to do as a parent as well as inculcating the order and so you know one in this little diagram I indicated that there's God the Father with the Sun behind him and he's ruling over this walled city so he's like the Metis spirit of the walled city it's very very nice very nice image brilliant image so it is the collective spirit of the city that's another way of thinking about it or the collective spirit of the city across time or the collective spirit of the force that built and maintained the city across time even better and that's associated with the Sun because it's a it's it's it's associated with enlightenment and illumination and all of those things that we associate with higher consciousness and vision it's a brilliant image and then I overlaid this so now of course the patriarchal aspect of existence can become tyrannical it does that quite regularly it's one of the existential dangers of human civilizations that civilization is a medication for chaos but it can spin out of control in and of itself and become its own sort of problem which is like a hyper order problem which then produces a chaos problem so every solution carries within it certain problems right because no solution is perfect and so you have to keep things in balance but it's one of the reasons that I'm really let's call it irritated about the postmodernists because they keep yammering about the patriarchy and it's very very annoying because because it's self-evident that social structures are tyrannical it's like that's not news folks that's obvious but that's not all they are and it's it's there it's the reduction of the entire complex solution let's say to a unit dimensional problem it's just Thai tyranny it's like no actually it's not just tyranny if you spent six months somewhere that was just tyranny you'd know the difference very very rapidly and that doesn't mean that everyone doesn't give up a pound or two or ten or twenty a flesh to participate even in the society that's as free as at Western society is we all get crushed and molded by the tyrannical force of social convention but at least in principle the benefit is worth the cost and then it's also up to you to make sure that you don't sacrifice more to the group than you should and you can start to tell if you're sacrificing more to the group than you should because you start to become resentful of other people that's part of them that's part of the psychological mechanism that's informing you of that so it's up to you to fight against you know the overarching pressure for conformity to retain your individual logos let's say but that's sort of your problem it's like the group wants you to behave now if you could behave and be creatively productive so much the better but that's pretty damn rare so the group generally tends to settle just for behave and there's a tyrannical element of that but what the hell is the alternative it's you know our society is based on consensus and the consensus is based on the sacrifice of a certain sacrifice of individuality even though individuality is absolutely necessary as a revitalizing force the society it's a very tight touch tough thing to manage properly so anyways you have the your physiological structure as your first line of ordering in relationship to chaos because your body presents you with the world in a certain way and then the second line of defense is something like the sociological structure that you can have it we could call those the competency hierarchies or something like that and thank God for them because you know maybe you're going to be able to specialize in one or two things in your life or five things but there's 300 things you need to know and if it's just you you know you'll be doing your genius level mathematics while your bath tub is leaking all over your all over your bathroom floor and that's not so good so you can call a plumber and hooray for that so you know we tend to cooperate to keep chaos under control and we tend to cooperate to keep order under control and that's the political dialogue right you maintain the culture to keep chaos under control and we balance the cultural property to keep the culture under control and that way we get to live reasonably peacefully reasonably productively for a reasonable amount of time and that's the best that we can do and we should have some gratitude when that's working because the default condition of things is that not only do they not work very well they work worse and worse over time all by themselves so anytime anything is working you should just be amazed by it all right so what does the frame look like well I think it looks something like this and this is as far as I can tell this is the bare-bones this is the bare bones of a variety of things it's a bear bowling story it's a bear bowling conceptual framework it's a bear bowling design to speak in high daguerreian terms it's like it's the bare bones world that you live in you're always in one of these worlds there's no getting out of them you can move from one to another but you're always in a world like this and so this is the world that you're in you're somewhere because you have to be somewhere now you might not know where that is which means that somewhere that you are is chaotic in which case you need to go over your past in great detail and figure out where you are so you're lost right here you're lost and the problem with being lost is when you're lost you don't know where to go and the problem with not knowing where to go is there's a million places that you could go and a million places is too many places for you to go without dying so being lost is not good so you need to know where you are one of the things that we built online my partners and I have this program called past authoring that helps people lay out the narrative of their past to identify to break their life down into six stages epochs we call them and then to identify the emotionally significant moments in each epoch and to write them out what happened negatively what happened positively what the consequences were what do you derive from it perhaps what you could have done differently perhaps what you learn from it all of that so that you can narrow in zero in on determining precisely where it is that you are right now and people are often loath to do that because they actually don't want to know they'd rather be spread out in a sort of half-blind manner in the fog hoping that the place that they're at is better than it really is and deluding themselves by remaining vague than to figure out I'm right here right now with these specific problems but it's actually better to do that because if you have a set of specific problems and you've really narrowed them down and really specified them then you could probably start fixing them and you can start fixing them in Mike microwaves bit by bit but there's no way you can do that without knowing where you are it's impossible and you can kind of tell if you don't know where you are it's quite straightforward if you are haunted by reveries of the past for events that are older than approximately eighteen months if they continue to come up in your mind over and over and your dreams over and over you haven't extracted the world out from your past experiences the potential is still trapped in the past and to confront the potential means to confront the dragon of the past and of course that's terrifying and it seems seriously be terrifying so for example maybe your vague and ill-formed and ill-defined because you will be used her dad when you were a child four years old something like that and maybe R abused by a family member because that's generally who does the abusing and so that just makes it works and then what that means is that you've got a implicit you had an implicit encounter with malevolent evil that know you've had a direct encounter with malevolent evil but you have an implicit hypothesis of malevolent evil that's plaguing you it's still there it's trapped in the memories right it's trapped in the representational structure and as an adult you're now faced with the necessity of articulating that fully before you have any chance whatsoever of freeing yourself from it and so that's no joke lots of times people have to go into the past that's what this I grant lists do and say and say look here is something came along just bloody well knocked me over and it isn't even that I repressed it which which I think was we will talk about Freud's errors because Freud was a genius so we'll just leave him alone but but sometimes it's not repression it's just the terrible things happen to people at such a young age that there isn't a bloody chance in hell that they can figure out why they happen or what to do with them or what they mean and then you can carry that with you and you carry it with you it's like here your your body encounters the world in two stages and it happens very rapidly well it can extend over years but the initial stage has happened very rapidly so for example if you're walking down the road and you hear a large noise be a loud noise behind you go like this that's a predator defense response by the way you crouch down and that's to stop something from jumping on your back and getting at your neck too easily that's like a few million two hundred milliseconds it's really fast or even faster than that and it better be because something like a snake like will say it can nail you just right now so you better be fast but it's low resolution it's like danger snake something like that or danger predatory cap it's that fast and then you can unravel that and categorize it but that takes time you do that with emotion and then you do it with cognition you can do that with long term thinking you know because maybe you've encountered someone specifically malevolent and predatory at work that happens to people a lot as a as a destructive bully and who seems to have no positive function whatsoever and is only living that out and then you you know you don't know what to do about it so you're you're in prey mode I don't mean this kind of mode although that would help too but I mean you're acting like a prey animal and then you have this terribly complex thing to decompose which is what the hell's up with this person why are they making my life miserable what is it about me that allows them to make my life miserable that's a nasty little road to walk down and you're stuck with having to you're stuck with having to decompose it maybe you can't maybe formulating an explicit philosophy of good and evil to deal with something malevolent in your environment actually just happens to be beyond you and that could easily be it's certainly the case for people who are young and it's the case for plenty of adults as well it's no simple thing to math to manage it's something to that often soldiers who have post-traumatic stress disorder have to do because they've encountered terrible things maybe they're Dunham or ran into them they need to update their moral model of the world or if they end up in something close enough closely approximating hell anyway so you need to know where you are that's this what is where are you so you're navigating your navigator you're a sailor on an ocean man that's what that's what you are you're a mobile creature you're going from point A to point B all the time you know it's sitting there glued to a rock like some brainless you know sea creature there's a funny little creature called a Hydra very simple little creature in its juvenile stage it has a brain because it swims around but then when it turns into an adult it latches itself to iraq and promptly digests its brain because if you're just sitting on a rock and you're not moving you don't need a brain so but that's not our issue right we're resuming in the world and so we're navigating agents so to navigate if there's two things you need to know the first is where the hell are you exactly precisely right razorsharp what's good about you and what's bad about you by your own by your own reckoning you don't have to you can ask other people but this is a game you play yourself it's like as far as I'm concerned I'm taking start what is it that's okay about me and what needs some work and you go to watch to not be too self-critical when you're doing that too because that can just be another kind of flaw and then the next is okay well where are you going what's your destination well and that's what the frame is now you know you could do that in a very sophisticated way and you do that by thinking consciously about who it is that you are in an articulated manner and where you want to go and why and how you're going to get there and people hardly ever do that that is that's come as such an absolute shock to me as an educator I just because one of the other programs I use this in my classes what are the other programs in this suite of programs is called the Future authoring program and I started developing it my maps of meaning class which is where some of this materials from and I got students to write about their past it's like okay we're talking about stories so let's tell your story who are you how do you get here what are you now that usually helps people put things to rest although it's quite stressful well you're doing it stress goes up when you're doing it and maybe you feel miserable for a couple of weeks and then stress goes down and it stays down so that's and that's also why people don't do it because who the hell wants to have their stress go up but if it's temporary it's a sacrifice so then the next issue is well where are you going and one of the things that and this I just still I cannot understand is students that have been in education system for 15 years 14 years high end students most of them not once in their whole bloody life did anyone ever get them to sit down for like a day and say alright justify your existence it's like well seriously it's like here you are in university you're taking a bunch of courses you've got some sort of vague career plan it's like defend the damn thing a bit since you're going to go live it and everything you're staking everything on it it's like what's your damn plan and why are you so convinced that it's not the plan of a babbling fool because if you haven't thought about it then it is and if you really want to go out there and live that out you know one of the things Carl Jung said was that you you're in a story whether you know it or not and and then he made two nice comments about that if it's someone else's story you're probably going to get a bit part and it might not be the one you want and if it's a story that you don't know it might be one with a really bad ending or maybe it's just bad period with a worse ending and if you don't know what the story that you're living out is maybe that's the one you know maybe you got that from your mother you got it from your grandmother you got it from your aunt or god only knows where you picked it up because you pick up things like mad because that's what human beings are like so maybe you're living a malevolent tragedy unconsciously and then one thing you might ask yourself is well how wretched and miserable is your life let's had futile to that how wretched miserable and futile is your life and you might say well yeah seventy percent on each count it's like then you're probably unconsciously living out a malevolent tragedy and maybe that's not for the best it's either that or the whole universe hates you right or 70 percent hates you you know so so anyways you know we got students to start writing in detail about not what they wanted it's not a career thing because that's the closest people usually get is they have a career plan it's like no no it's not a career plan that's that's peripheral important but peripheral it's like all right you got three years man you're going to live them anyways devote those three years to setting the world up around you so that it's the best it could possibly be for you as if you were taking care of yourself as if you cared for yourself well what would that look like you know let's say just for the sake of argument if you figured out where you work that you could have what would be best for you well what is that I bet you <div class="cue active style-scope ytd-transcript-body-renderer" start-offset="3046410">never asked people don't ask and so life comes out them like random snakes and they sort of fend them off and life goes by and things don't work out the way people expected them to but a huge part of that is they didn't know where they were but they wouldn't look or didn't know that they should look ignorant willful blindness right two great catastrophes and they never figured out where they wanted to go or why now there's a problem with figure out where you want to go and the problem is is that you make your conditions for failure clear to yourself and people don't like that so if you keep yourself in the fog then you can't tell when you screwed up now that isn't so good because you're still screwing up you're just too blind self blind to notice although in the short term not less painful if you make your criteria for success razor-sharp then you know every time you screw up but that's great because then you could fix it you could either repair the the behavioral it adequacy or the conceptual inadequacy that you're using as a tool in that situation or maybe you could adjust your dam plan either way you can fix it and so okay so you're living in one of these bloody things and you might as well it seems to me you might as well make it the best one you could live in because you don't have anything better to do now if you don't do that if you don't do it consciously and this is what the psychoanalyst pointed out is that you have enumerable quasi autonomous subsystems that make you up that will generate stories impulsively and you'll just act them out and you know that because you watch yourself over two weeks and you think Jesus I did a lot of stupid things in the last two weeks and you think why it's because you're a random you're a collection of somewhat random quasi autonomous personality units and lacking a leader they're just going to fire off whenever they want you know first you're hungry then you're thirsty then you want to go to bed with your wife you know then you want to sleep in and you want to tell your boss off and you want to curse at the guy that cuts you off in traffic it's like you're kind of like a two-year-old you know just it's one emotional frame after another vying for dominance there's no overarching hierarchy and there's no king at the top and so you know we already talked about pyramids of competence and what's supposed to be at the top is you want to bring all those things together we understand this neurologically I'll show you some of that in a little bit we understand this neurologically how how this maps in some sense right on to the neural structure of your being you want to put something in control and the thing that you should put in control is the bloody thing that pays attention and learns right everything else in the hierarchy should be subordinate to the thing that pays attention and learns and you could think well that's that's the message of the idea of logos that's for sure because logos is partly attention and partly communication and you learn a lot by communicating with others okay so you need to know where you are just like your GPS which is about the closest thing we have to an intelligent cybernetic system those GPS is in your cars those bloody things are pretty smart because they can they know where you are they know where you're going and if you go off course they recalculate your route it's like those things are damn near alive that's so close to intelligence it's and you can tell that because they act intelligently they solve problems continually so you need and this is a cybernetic model by the way and cybernetic models for the models on which the GPS systems were based so it's not accidental so you need to know where you are and you need to know where you're going and then the next thing you need to know is how it is that you're going to act move your body how you're going to propel yourself through time and space to transform this into that and so ok and then we can we can make that a little bit more complex because it's a bit too simple so we'll do this so it isn't exactly that you live in one of these it's that you live in a nested hierarchy of these and you could think of this as your own internal patriarchy that's a good way of thinking about it and maybe it could be a tyrant or maybe it could be something that gives you security and functional autonomy and hopefully that's the one you go for it but it's a battle you know because a little bit of tyranny exists in everyone and so well so at the very highest level of analysis that would be the overarching story maybe you think I'd like to be a good person or a successful person or famous person I think Goods probably a bit better because you can come up with the definition of good if you want as long as it doesn't annoy other people too badly because they'll just get in your way and that won't be helpful so you have to negotiate it but let's say you're a good person that's sort of the story at the top of the hierarchy and then you could decompose that into your primary roles maybe you're a good parent maybe you're a good employer or maybe you're a good employee maybe you're a good sibling maybe you're a good child you know those are major roles that you have in your life and so you'd say that what good person is is what's good about you across all those rules so it's a it's a it's a higher-order abstraction from something more concrete and then you can take the you know the role good parent and you can say well what is it that constitutes a good parent and you might say well a good parent this isn't exhaustive obviously a good parent has a good job and takes care of his or her family and then you might say well what does it mean to take care of your family and then you might say well you know you you can cook the odd meal not too odd hopefully you can cook the odd meal and you can play with play with the baby and then you might say well how do you play with a baby and then you might say well you play peek-a-boo with the baby or you tickle the baby okay well that's what's a cool there's a cool shift there because this is all articulated and conceptual right right down to this level and then all of a sudden it's your body because how do you play peekaboo is a baby you don't like have a chat about how you play peek-a-boo with a baby right you go like this it's great fun you can even do it with older people they even smile about it right it's dad's gone and the baby's all shocked to death about that where to go oh look he's back you know it's the baby is playing with the reliability of the world so it's real intense game for a baby like oh no dad god no look he showed up again oh no he's gone and then bad smiling to indicate that those brief flashes into non-existence aren't existentially terrifying beyond capacity right and so but the point is is that if you're playing peek-a-boo with the baby you're not thinking anymore it's not in the realm of articulation or abstraction it's actually something that you're doing with your body and so to me this is a nice multistage solution to the mind-body problem because what happens is the highest the higher order of abstraction its articulated and conceptual but if you decompose it sufficiently you end up with an actual action and the action involves the movement of musculature it's not something conceptual and one of the things that's really cool about this hierarchy is that it has educational lessons so one of the things you want to do if you're trying to teach someone something even yourself is you want to you want to specify the thing that needs to be doing at the highest resolution possible level so I'll give you just a brief example so let's say I may have we may be repeating this but it doesn't matter say you've got a three-year-old kid and they're in their room is chaos right this monsters are going to be coming out under the bed in no time flat unless that thing room gets some order in it and so you you tell the kids clean up the room you know it's a mess and you leave and you come back and the kids like throwing Legos everywhere it's they're not cleaning up and then you think that's a bad kid that's a bad theory a because you're going right from here to here if you want to have a good fight with someone and destroy them then that's what you do you don't bother with the subtleties down here you just go right from the great for the jugular it's like you're a bad stupid kid you've always been that way you're hopeless there's not a chance of teaching you anything right and we can that way you can nail the past the present and the future all of the same in so you've always been a terrible person there's no teaching you and your future is going to be exactly the same way then the only thing the person can do if you do that to them is hit you because that's that's it there's no there's no coming back from that you've boxed them completely in so if you want to have a really unproductive argument you go right for this past present and future you're not a good person demolish their entire conceptual structure and expose them completely naked to chaos it's like great you won the argument it's not a good thing to do to your long-term partner let's say unless you want them terrified out of this skull and characterised and their attitude towards you characterized by non-stop extreme resentment it's probably not going to do your love life a hell of a lot of good for example so with the three year old maybe what you do is you say you pick the level of analysis at which they're actually functioning and you say and this is something you can do if you pay attention to a kid and lots of people won't pay attention to children because they're terrified of them they're terrified that they'll do something wrong with them and or that the kid won't like them or some damn thing it's like all you have to do to get a kid to like you is pay attention to the kid for like two seconds and the kid will instantly like you because attention is so it's such a it's it's the ultimate currency for children right they need adult attention because adults know way more than kids and so they love attention all you have to do is pay attention to them they will like you instantly so they tell the kid you see that teddy bear kid goes yes then you've established that the child has mastered the art of perceiving a teddy bear because they can say yes it's this complicated thing man it's like I aged six months old isn't going to do that three months old has got the whole teddy bear identification subroutine and traumatized so teddy bear yes can you pick it up yes pat pat pat good work do you see the hole on that show yes can you put the teddy bear in that hole yes go over do that pat pat pat great ok now we'll do thing number two thing number three so you're building up the micro routines of cleaning up the room from the bottom up right you you're building it into their body because you're starting with the things they've already automatized and building upwards towards abstraction and so once the kid has all the micro routines down and maybe there's I don't know how many micro routines are there to clean up your room 200 like a lot but not an infinite number so you teach them all the micro routines and then you can say run set of micro routines which means clean up room and then they can do it they know what it means so but you do the building from the bottom up and lots of times when you're arguing with someone that you live with and hypothetically loved although those two things are hard to get together in the same relationship what you want to do is assume is assume stupidity before you assume total in total malevolence that's that's that's a good rule of thumb for establishing peace so maybe if your partner won't do something well maybe it's there's something going on up here but you might want to assume to begin with they actually just don't know how to do it and you need to decompose it so maybe there's a way you want to be greeted when you come home because you're going to come home every day probably and maybe that's a five minute interaction or a 10 minute interaction so that's an hour a week or four hours a month or 50 hours a year or one solid work week of coming home interactions right all you have to do is get 50 interactions like that right and you've got your relationships sorted out that's something that's really worth thinking about so that's it there's you just don't have that much time right get the meals sorted out that's about five hours a day get your sleeping time Arrangements sorted out get the fundamental interactions that you repeat with your partner worked out voluntarily and negotiated you're going to cover 80% of your life that way and then it can just run as a routine and that's really helpful and if you don't do that consciously especially because our roles have fragmented and most of the traditional rules have disappeared and so nobody knows who the hell is supposed to do what in the kitchen for example so nobody does anything except bitch and fight make wretched meals or or buy or buy fast food or some something like that so you know the alternative to that catastrophic failure or continual resentment and fighting is to rebuild the structures from the bottom up using consensus and negotiation and you can do that so that you can think of that as the patriarchal structure that's a good one and I mean it's partly psychological because these are things you do as a person but it's also partly political economic and sociological because while you're doing each of these things you're also doing them in a way that's socially hopefully not just socially acceptable but actually socially desirable and so that's that's the decomposition and the reason that this keeps chaos at bay is because it isn't because your belief systems keep chaos at bay it's not that abstract it's that if you do things right do these things right then terrible things happen to you with less frequency and that's not the psyche like it's partly psychological because maybe you don't fight as much maybe not anxious as much maybe you're not as depressed but a lot of it's just practical if you just if you you know if your kid doesn't leave his skateboard on the stairs then you don't break your neck as often and that's not just psychological that's actually a good thing not to break your neck so often and so this structure isn't merely something that keeps things at bay psychologically okay so here's a here's another look at a hierarchy of a narrative the structure that keeps chaos at bay and this is maybe the hierarchy that I engage in when I'm writing and I'm doing all these things at the same time that's that's what's cool you know like that when I ask student what are you doing when you write an essay it's like well that's hard question right it's like well you're fast and important question that's the first thing you should do if you're writing an essay then you're paying attention to the words and the phrases in the sentences and the sentence relationship between the sentences within the paragraphs and the paragraph relationships to one another within the essay and then they ask these relevance to the class and the class is relevance to your life and what the essay bleeds out across your entire life and so if I'm writing something well obviously at the most highest resolution level of analysis I'm actually moving my fingers on the keyboard and moving my eyes back and forth on the screen that's where the mind meets the body but then I'm trying to formulate a sentence and so I try to think up a good sentence that's that's nailing what I am trying to formulate and then I try to pick it apart and I do that a bunch of ways take the sentence and I put it on another page and then a rate like 10 different variants of the sentence and see if I can get a better variant and then I try to think of ways that it's a stupid sentence to see if I can you know put a pry bar underneath it and loosen it up and if I can't do anything if I can't manage that then I keep the sentence that I've got and then I do that with ten sentences in a paragraph and I make sure the sentences are all arranged properly in the paragraph the same way by rewriting a bunch of different variants of it and trying to <div class="cue active style-scope ytd-transcript-body-renderer" start-offset="3998190">get the word right in a phrase right and the sentence right and the sentence order right and the paragraph order right and I can tell what it's right enough because I can't make it any better it doesn't mean it's right it just means I can't improve it and so I get to the point where if I'm writing a paragraph and I write a variant and I can't tell if the variance is any better and it might be worse than I'm done I'd hit the limit of my intellectual capacity and it's time to move on but then but you know that it isn't like the essay that I'm writing let's say has a boundary it's tightly drawn around the essay because there's a reason I'm writing the damn essay and that would be well I'm trying to I'm turned write a whole manuscript hopefully I'm trying to address an important problem because why would I be doing it otherwise I mean that'd be kind of pointless and maybe that's part of my role as a scientist and that's a subset of my role as a professor and then that's a subset of my role as a productive citizen and then that's a subset of my role of someone who confronts the unknown see and that's why the logos is the thing that's at the top of the hierarchy that's how the hierarchy should be structured is that everything else should be see because you have a structure do you think well what should the structure be subordinate to and then the answer should be something like the structure should be subordinate to the process that generates the structure or the structure should be subordinate to the process that generates and maintains the structure well obviously how could it be any other way unless the structure is perfect with the in which case you dispensed with the thing that generates it and improves it but then you're a totalitarian it's like hey we got the answer it's like no you don't people are still suffering and they're still dying you don't have the damn answer and so maybe you have an answer that means that there isn't quite as much suffering and dying as there could be but there's plenty of road to be traveled yet and so it all makes perfect sense that all of this should be should be nested within this highest sigh think of it sort of as the highest order of moral striving and then that also gives you moral hierarchy that's the most important thing we do that with honor speech you do that with the tension and honest speech that's how you do that and you don't sacrifice that to any of this because if you do then then you're hurting your soul it's there's this idea in the New Testament that the sin against the Holy Ghost is the one sin that can't be forgiven no one knows what the hell that means maybe it doesn't mean anything but I think this is what it means is that because this process generates all this if you violate that process then there's no hope for you because that's the process by which you improve yourself and everyone else to everything else so if you decide you're not going to engage in that it's like well there's no fixing that because you've blown apart your relationship with the thing that does the fixing and so ok and so that's how you keep chaos at bay and so part of that is structural right because you know how to do these things more or less it's part of your skill set if you happen to be a writer you could build one of these for a plumber it doesn't doesn't make any difference really although the outside things should be the same which is I think partly why in in the judeo-christian tradition there's the assumption that people are fundamentally equal before God and what that means is that well they should be nested everyone regardless of their particularly particularities as individuals their highest order function is that they do it in whatever manner they can manage and that's an extraordinarily valuable or maybe the most extraordinarily valuable sociological political and economic function and so that's why people are valuable it's like we have this faculty to continually generate improvements to the structure that we jointly inhabit great that gives us it's so cool because that gives us a fundamental unity we've got the highest order of analysis with with the room for as much diversity as you can possibly manage right because it actually turns out that the more the sub structures differ the better because then you know you can be doing something different than me that would be good because if we were doing the same thing then it's just duplication of labor if we could agree on the higher order principle and then specialize that the lower order levels it's like that's you get to have your cake and eat it too and that doesn't happen very often so so and so then another rule of thumb is if you're trying to solve a problem solve it at this level highest resolution level possible before you dare move up dare move up the hierarchy because the as you move up the abstraction hierarchy the probability that you'll make a catastrophic error while attempting to fix the problem radically increases because abstraction is very very powerful and so you want to be very careful I mean we saw that when you know when the you know when the mortgage market crashed the reason it crashed was because of strange use of derivatives and derivatives are like higher order abstractions in the financial world and derivatives give you tremendous financial leverage and power with huge risk and so the upside is massive absolutely massive because you can multiply your earnings but the downside is complete bloody catastrophe and so part of what I would say an intelligent conservative ethos is is solve the problem at the highest level of resolution the highest level most local level of resolution it's safer and it's more likely to actually produce a solution ok now so now you're in your plan now we're simplified again just to one little map right but all those other things are nested in there and so what happens to you as you stroll merrily on your way through life well what happens is that as you're moving from point A to point B you encounter things and people think that what they encounter are but that's not the case first of all most of the things that you encounter many of the things are actually other people and they're not objects they're too damn complex and even apart from the social world the things that you encounter aren't objects they seem to be something more like tools or obstacles and I don't mean that we see objects and turn them into tools or obstacles I mean that we see tools and obstacles because what happens is that when you array yourself towards a goal then the world transforms itself into things that get in the way of that goal and things that three things things are get in the way of the goal things those are things you don't like things that facilitate your movement towards the goal those are things that you like and the irrelevant things and mostly you want irrelevant things because there's just too damn many things so the category of irrelevant is one you really like so most the thing most of everything is irrelevant if you have a good plan a few things are good because they move you forward and some other things are not so good you want to go around the not so good things if you can manage them unless you like to run head forth into like brick walls which is not particularly so learning experience but I would repeat it too many times you want you want the world to array itself as a set of we could say tools now what happens is that you have this perceptual system that's mediated by dopamine it's the same system that cocaine activates or methamphetamine or the drugs that people really like to take and it's the dopaminergic system that responds with positive emotion to indications that you've encountered something that will facilitate your movement towards a goal and that's really important to know because people tend to think that they're happy because they achieve goals and that's not true what's true it because as soon as you achieve a goal then you have a problem which is what's the next goal and that's actually a big problem you encounter that as soon as you graduate from university for example it's right I made this joke before the graduation day here's like king of the university hierarchy undergraduate hierarchy day after you're unemployed potential Starbucks employee right so it's like so obviously the accomplishment per se as a source of reward is is problematic because when you accomplish you run the frame to its and then you have the problem of needing a new frame so that's a problem but if what you're encountering instead are things that will move you along your way it's like hey that's great and that's where you get your positive motivation and so that's really thinking that's so much we're thinking about you can think about that for a year and that wouldn't even be enough to think about it because here's what it means it means in some sense that the Buddhists are right with their claim about Maya mnya which means that people live in an illusion and what they mean by that is well you have goal whatever your goal is and that goal gives relevance to the world and you could change the relevance of the world in a snap just by changing your goal you can do that and so then you think well it's sort of an illusion because you can just change it now you don't want to push that line of argumentation too far because even if the specific point can be changed the fact that you're in one of these frames cannot be changed and so you have to be in a frame although you get to pick the frame so there's still an absolute there which is that you have to be in the frame and that is not a trivial absolute it's a very it's a very major absolute so then you think okay all of your positive emotion is going to be experienced in relationship to the goal well then we think well you could use some positive emotion it's a good thing positive emotion inhibits anxiety and disappointment and frustration and pain it does all that technically it does that that's why a football player with a broken thumb who wants to score a touchdown can go out there you know play the football game even though it's a kind of an arbitrary goal right it's like really you're going to go out there and like risk your hand to fire a pigskin through some some polls it's like well you could say the same sort of cynical thing about most of the things that people do but you can't say the silikal thing about the fact that they have to do things so you have a you have a point you have your aim you have your ambition and then that's what turns the world into a potentially positive place and here's the kicker this is so cool the higher they aim the more the positive emotion so that's that you think well why should I bother you why should I bother doing something lofty and difficult it's like because it's worth it that's why because the alternative is stupid suffering because really really because what happens is like you don't need a framework in order to suffer you can just lay there day after day and suffer right that's the easy that's the default condition if you don't have a lofty ambition then you suffer miserably and the reason for that is life is really complex short finite full of suffering and Beyond you and so you can just lay there and think about that and it's horrible and so that's not helpful it's just not useful and so you know people often say life is meaningless it's like no it's not that's wrong because it was meaningless that would be easy you could just sit there and do nothing and it would matter right it'd be like you were look like you're like a lobotomized sheep it's just irrelevant but that isn't what happens when people say that life has no meaning that isn't what they mean what they mean is I'm suffering stupidly and intensely and I don't know what to do about it well the suffering is meaningful it's just not the kind of meaning you want so how do you get out of that you adopt you you note the baseline of suffering which is very very very very high and then you say to yourself okay I need to do something that justifies that and that's not so easy because it's the baseline for suffering is high if you're going to make something of yourself let's say so that it's worthwhile to exist in the world then you have to do is you have to aim at something that's so well structured that you can say yeah earthquakes cancer death of my family dissolution of my goals ultimate futility of life and the heat death of the universe hey it doesn't matter it's worth it alright so now here's an here's another complicating factor so I said well there's three things that you can run into when you're going about your your goal and I would say if you're going to farm a goal it's going to form a plan look about three to five years out in the future because beyond that you get something called combinatorial explosion and it means that there's so many variables you just can't predict so there's not that much point looking out 20 years because like what the hell you know what's going to happen in 20 years nothing three years maybe you've got maybe you can chart a course to three years five years something like that so that's not a bad segment of time to to consider and then consider what your life would have to be like in order for it to be worthwhile for you knowing also what you're going to be like if it isn't worthwhile for you and what you're going to be like if it isn't worthwhile for you is Caine that's what you're like because that's what that story's about because Abel's the guy who has a goal and is making the proper sacrifices and Cain is the person for whom by his own fault at least in part things aren't working out for and so the default for not doing this is something like building resentment bitterness with an underlying what would you call it flavor enhancer of murderous resentment something like that which you will act out in the world which people act out in the world all the time and it's no wonder because without this without something lofty pulling you along then the baseline is stupid suffering and you know if you take an analog and you just chained in the backyard you know you put a collar on it that's too tight so it chafes all the time and it can't even bark and you know there's just dirt around it it's too goddamn hot out in the Sun and maybe don't give it enough water you know it's not going to be very happy dog it's basic conditions misery well the same applies to people so all right so you're on your way to see you remember the you've all probably watched Pinocchio or know about it one of the things that happens it's really cool in Pinocchio is that when Geppetto decides that he wants his puppet to be a genuine autonomous being he wishes upon a star it's a very strange thing but everybody just swallows it because we don't notice when we're swallowing things that are that are completely preposterous you know it's this animated puppeteer which is not a star that is puppet is going to become real and everybody know it's their head and goes oh you have that big sense it's like no it doesn't it doesn't make any sense at all but it doesn't matter it doesn't make this sort of sense that we normally associate with sense it makes a kind of meta sense and everybody understands it so this is what Geppetto is doing is he's elevating his eyes above the horizon so out of the realm of the worldly let's say to the transcendent and the transcendent will say for all intents and purposes you can see the transcendent spread above you in the heaven that arches over us it gets close enough for our purposes and there's a star there and a star of something that's eternal that shines in the darkness and so Geppetto makes an agreement with the transcendent he says look I'm willing to do whatever it takes that my creation becomes autonomous well that's exactly this situation that you want to set up for yourself is like okay you've got to figure out what star you're going to orient yourself by and you have to ask yourself like no one's ever asked you okay if you have the choice to make your life worth living what's your price what do you need just find out first of all you just ask you'll tell yourself like you'll be afraid because if I'll never get that it's like don't lower your sights a little bit then you know don't ask for a 80-foot super yacht in like six months that just means you're stupid you know as it doesn't mean you're not you know first of all it's not going to make you happy anyways you know it's just not it's not it's not wise you're asking you supposed to be asking yourself this question like you're someone you care about so you imagine you're talking to some 12 year old kid that you kind of like thank God it wouldn't be so bad if this twelve-year-old kid at a decent life so you - it's like it wouldn't be so bad the universe wouldn't mind if you had a decent life if there is little less suffering on your part especially if you didn't you know foist it off on other people if there's a little less suffering on your part and you made things a little better everywhere you went it's like the universe would probably okay with that so you could I think you could get away with it if you're sort of quiet about it and so ask yourself okay so then once you've established your your target you know where you are then you know what's good for you because that moves you along and that happens at a perceptual level you don't have to think about it anymore and the experimental literature and that's already quite clear so for example if I specify that podium as the target for my action you know then I'm happy when I'm walking towards it because there it is and everything cooperating really nicely but if I specify going to the exit sign that you guys can't see that's the that that this is an obstacle in the front of then as soon as I specify that then that's an annoying obstacle and that's precognitive it just happens immediately it happens instantaneously and so it really is the case that you you you're you're being manifests itself inside these frames and so what's so cool about that is you can change the frame it doesn't mean you can like juggle planets or anything like that but it does give you quite a scope of what I'm trammeled action within the world and if the frame isn't working out then you can tweak it or sometimes you have to make a major adjustment in it whatever you don't have to stick to the damn thing like it's the ideology that you're going to die for it's a tentative plan it's a work in progress and it's nuts with the future authoring program one of the things I recommend for people is that they should do it badly because you're not going to get it right anyways but a reasonable plan is way better than no plan plus a reasonable plan is a plan that has built into it the processes that will enable the plan to get better as you implement it so you just start with AB reasonable plan so you don't have to worry about whether it's correct it's not correct doesn't matter it's better than nothing that's the issue so okay so you've got the world parsed up into things that make making you happy when you look at them things that get in the way that produce negative emotion and then a whole host of irrelevant things because almost everything is irrelevant and that's where all the chaos is hiding the chaos is hiding in what's irrelevant and so and that's very interesting observation because since the chaos is virtually infant I think surreal questions where the hell do you put it well you put it in what you ignore and you can ignore it as long as it isn't actively interfering with your movement forward you can assume that it's that it doesn't matter that it in matter that it doesn't matter same thing alright so here's the kicker there's one more class of things that you can run into along the way and this is where the chaos breaks through so let's say you're moving from point A to point B and something that you don't expect Oh curves and it gets in the way so let's say that you're living with someone and maybe you kind of like them you're not married so you don't like them that much because otherwise you'd ask them to marry you but anyways and so high quarter of youth is looking for something better and 3/4 of view is half satisfied something like that and then a person because we're ambivalent about such things and then the person you discover or the person announces that they'd be having an affair okay so then how are you supposed to respond emotionally to that well the part of you that wasn't all that committed to the relationship is kind of exhilarated by that and then the 3/4 of you that's half satisfied is hurt and and you're going to exploit that part for sure in the ensuing discussions and not mention the oh that's kind of exciting that you you know betrayed me that way so so but the point is is that you that's a whole now what's happened as a whole has you have this structure that you're walking on like ice like the thin ice that you're skating on and now there's a hole in it and the hole we don't even know how deep the hole is but you know there's a hole there and so now you're anxious about it though maybe also a little bit excited because god only knows what's down there but but you don't know what to do with that hole because it could spread very badly on you it could be that you know the whole relationship was a facade and that all your relationships have been facade facade and that the reason that is is because you're so damn shallow that it's impossible for you to have a relationship that isn't just a facade and that's partly because you don't pay any attention to other people and it's also partly because your malevolent and selfish so that's a nasty thing to discover or maybe that's the sort of person that you're attracting which would make sense actually if that's the sort of person that you are and so so there are certain things that you can encounter that basically unglue you and what happens is that those moments of being unglued travel up that entire hierarchy of presuppositions it's like because the one of the logical conclusions to being betrayed in a relationship is that you are that you're truly a bad person now another equally logical conclusion is that the person that you're with is really a bad person and another logical conclusion is all people are truly bad people you know I mean it in microwaves out in microwaves you can't trust anyone you can't trust women you can't trust men you can't trust human beings you can't trust yourself the whole place is a catastrophe it's a nightmare well then you can fall through into chaos now the way your body responds to that when some or maybe you know you're supposed to be getting a promotion at work that's good you're all chipper about the promotion at work and you you walk into your boss's office because he or she wants to see you and they say wow you know we've reviewed your performance over the last few years and your performance has been somewhere between mediocre and decent and we're downsizing and see you later that's not a raise or a promotion that's for sure not so whole that you fall into and the question is well what do you make of that right how do you frame that how do you take that emergent chaos and make habitable order out of you don't know is the whole capitalist system rotten to the core I mean that's a convenient explanation under those circumstances that's for sure were you working for a psychopathic son of a bitch did you make the wrong choice in university and was that your father's fault because you never did what you want or was it your fault for not standing up to them or is it a dying industry or is maybe this a wake-up call that you should go do something else that you've been waiting to do you know that you've actually wanted to do your whole life and that's why you're doing such a miserable job at your current occupation because you're bitter and resentful about the fact that you never did what you want you don't know it's all of those things at once and that's very stressful because all of those things at once is too many things and that's the reimburse of chaos that's the flood that's the return to the beginning of the cosmos that's another way that it's been represented mythologically it's that you voyage all the way back to the beginning of the cosmos when there's nothing but undifferentiated chaos and that's what you're confronting and maybe it's too much for you and it's often it is I mean that that can really that can be traumatizing it can hurt your brain you know it's just too much for you to bear but it doesn't matter you're stuck with it and so how do you respond to that well some of it is catastrophic negative emotion you freeze and that's protective and maybe you don't even want to move you don't want to bloody well get out of bed for a week and that's because your body is reacting as if the bedroom floor is covered with snakes and the best thing for you to do is just not move just freeze not a pleasant situation to be in because it's you're hyper aroused very very physiologically demanding and there's zero about if it's productive except maybe the snakes won't see you but they've already seen you so that isn't helping very well so you've got all this undifferentiated negative emotion anxiety fear hurt anger guilt shame emotional pain the whole plethora of catastrophes and then maybe on the other side lurking down there is thank God I'm done without you oughta just bloody well hate it I dragged myself off to work every day and there's a little part of my soul that's a goddamn happy I finally got fired that I can hardly stand it you know maybe you don't even admit that to yourself because well that would mean that all that time you spent at the job was just some cost you're deluding yourself the whole time I mean isn't an interesting thing to consider though sometimes if you're in the unpleasant circumstance of having to fire someone you know sometimes firing someone is the best thing that can happen to them which doesn't mean that you should go out and like enjoy it although I have met very disagreeable people who actually enjoyed firing people I'll tell you a story about that at some point because it's quite interesting but you know sometimes if someone's just limping along in their job and doing it as miserably and wretchedly as they possibly can imagine the best thing you can do to them for them is to say you know you're failing at this and and that doesn't necessarily mean that you would have to be failing it absolutely everything else in the entire world so maybe you should just accept the dam failure and go off and try something new and I mean that's terrifying for people and I know they hate it and all that but but but sometimes it's better than the alternative which is just slow torturous death so here's a funny way of looking at it so let's say you fall right in for that hole that's underneath any everything and you've hit an anomaly that you don't understand you say what's that anomaly made out of exactly I know that's a strange way of thinking about it you know because it's not what you could say we'll just go along with that it's a metaphor what's that anomaly made out it well here's a way of thinking but it's made out of spirited matter and here's why this is something I learned in part from Piaget said what's made out of matter because of course that's the world matter and the world is also what matters and so that's kind of a nice duality there but it's made out of spirit because when you encounter something anomalous and go down the rabbit hole when you go into the underworld that's underneath everything that you've relied on you learn things down there so what's down there is information and that's now it's maybe way more information than you want but it is information it's information and what can what can you do with the information you can inform yourself with the information right you could put yourself in formation with the information that's helpful too and so and you think well you you're a psyche if you're not a spirit it depends on you know whether you're a materialist or not but at least we can say that you're a psyche the question is what's your psyche made up well it's obviously go out of material some right but the matter happens to be arrayed in a particular order and that's an information order and so when you fall into the underworld that's underneath everything and you encounter that latent information then what you can do is enhance your psyche you can grow your spirit because what you do is you take the new information and you incorporate it that's like eating the Apple that out of an EVE it you incorporate that and that makes more of you and that's not a metaphorical or a metaphysical proposition it's not to say nothing other than well that's what happens when children learn you think what happens charles's three has a pretty low resolution representation of the world and is a fairly low resolution human being got all the constituent elements there but isn't differentiated in any tremendous manner that's all still to come in the future and so what if the child do explore what do they explore things they don't understand that's where the information is because you already understand what you understand there's no information there you go where there where you don't understand that's where the information is and out of that information you generate a higher resolution world and you generate a higher resolution self and so out of the combat with the underlying dragon of chaos you generate spirit and matter and that's what you do when you go down into the underworld so if it doesn't kill you or if it doesn't make you wish you were dead which you probably will but there's a bunch of you that has to die down there anyway so maybe that's not such a bad thing because if you had this relationship that ended in betrayal then there's something that's just not exactly right right there's something that wentz and the reason I'm saying that think well that's kind of moralistic it's like actually I don't mind being moralistic in case you haven't noticed but but that's not it's not a fair comment because you're playing this stupid game it's like you live with someone in fidelity that's the game right you've decided the rules with the game comes a morality the morality are the rules of the game well then the thing collapses into infidelity it's like well you played the game wrong or it was the wrong game one of those two you it's one of those two you pick the damn game and having picked the game you can't say well no those aren't the rules it's like yeah yeah if you pick the game you pick the rules and if you fail at complying with the rule then you fail now you could say well I could pick a different game it's like I don't care how you solve the problem you're still stuck with the problem it's a moral problem fundamentally and it might take some major-league retooling to to fix it so you're at point a trying to get to point B that's not working out you hit an anomaly you're not getting the point B that's for sure your medical school student you write your MCATs which is a test you have to write to go to medical school you get 25th percentile I don't know who you are but you're not a pre-med student and maybe you never were right and that's the rub man and so who the hell are you you don't know collapse down here into this motivational conflict this place of motivation unemotional uncertainty and tremendous information right it's a place of transformation it's the Phoenix that burns it's the burning part of the Phoenix that burns it's it's the journey to the underworld it's the journey to hell it can really be a journey to hell because you may find out that the reason that your partner betrayed you or that you didn't get your damn promotions because there's seriously something wrong with you and you know it and I don't just mean that you don't know what you're doing I mean that there's 25 percent of you that is seriously aiming at things not being good and so you fall into the underworld and you find out that oh god I just got exactly what I was aiming for or I got exactly what the worst part of me was aiming for and that worst part that's something to clean up and that's not going to be easy because it's got it tooks to me like something something ferocious something seriously ferocious and I've been toying with it for a very long time and maybe I can't even detach it anymore and so that's not so fun and you see people like that in psychotherapy very frequently or you see them wandering around on the streets like absolute catastrophic former shells of themselves you know because they've hit the underworld and they ended up in hell and there's no getting out so those are the people you tend to give a wide berth to when you walk down the street so there you are down in underworld right back where the latent information exists and just too much of it and that's this it's the same thing it's the same thing and that's why the Adam and Eve story is archetypal right because we're always ingesting something new that knocks us into a new state of self-consciousness and it's always a catastrophic demolition of our current of our previous paradise insufficient as that paradise was something comes along to destroy it and knocks the slats out of our life and that's a voyage to the underworld out of the walled garden into chaos and so what is all of that well there's lots of ways of construing it it's a it's a frame transformation there's a walled city it's got a hole in it because all walled cities have holes in them right because everything's imperfect and that's where the chaos comes up and then maybe you go out there like a hero to fight the chaos and to reestablish the frame that's what you're supposed to do and maybe you free some information while you're doing that or maybe you establish your relationship and so that's the journey frame damage chaos voluntary confrontation reconstitution of the world and that's that's human existence and hopefully it's not just a little linear it's it's stepwise right is that the you that emerges as a consequence of your latest catastrophe is everything that you were before plus something more and that actually constitutes what you might describe as measurable progress right and that's another argument against moral relativism because if you can do everything that you could do before and you can do some more things we could just define that as better it's not a bad definition and then we have up it's like what you're trying to do is to differentiate the world and differentiate yourself and every time you undergo one of these revolutions then hopefully both of those things happen and then there's a moral to that story too which is do it voluntarily and maybe do it don't wait for it to happen catastrophic ly keep your eyes open and when something goes a little bit wrong that you could fix fix it don't say no that doesn't matter maybe it does matter maybe it is matter maybe it's exactly the matter out of which you should be built maybe it's the matter out of which the world should be built and if part of you is telling you it matters what it means is that that part is telling you that there's something there that you need to engage with that's what it means for something to matter I really get out of the kick a kick out of the word matter because it's got these two weird meanings right there's the matter that everything is made out of the materialists think everything is made out of and that's just dead matter and then there's the matter that life is made out of which is what matters and now and then you're moving through life and something matters it's calling to you and that's the unrevealed world trying to reveal itself to you and all you have to do is allow it to reveal itself to you and then maybe what happens is that a minor shit shifted shape is all that has to happen to you you don't have to burn right down to the bloody egg and and hatch out you know as a newborn maybe you can just repair a little bit of something that's gone wrong with you and so you can undergo a sequence of continual micro deaths instead of waiting for the bloody catastrophe that might send you so far down that you'll never recover and all you have to do is attend to what matters and your whole nervous system is it's doing this for you you've got a goal something happens it matters so what are you supposed to do with that you're supposed to you're supposed to fix it you're supposed to engage with it that's why it's calling out to you as if it matters it's saying there's an indeterminate part of the world here that wants to manifest itself into fully articulated being and it's calling to you to do that and if you ignore it then it accumulates and if accumulates it turns into the dragon of chaos and then it waits until you're not at your best and then it eats you and that's the alternative so that seems like a bad plan unless you like being lunch meat so so that's a long introduction to Noah but you need it you know because you can't understand the story otherwise and so because that's what the story is about and now we can go through the story relatively rapidly although it doesn't look like we'll go through all of it tonight okay so we'll start with the next section of Genesis and this is immediately after Cain and Abel and there's a short story to begin with just a fragment I called it Giants of the earth and it came to pass when men began to multiply on the face of the earth so this is after Cain and Abel that and daughters were born unto them that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair and took them wives of all which they chose and the Lord said my spirit shall not always strive with man for that he is also flesh yet his days will be 120 years there were giants in the earth in those days and also after that when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men and they bare children to them the same became mighty men which were of old men of renown now there's been all sorts of attempts to interpret those few rather jumbled lines but I see it as a reflection of did a classic development of hero mythology which is there and this is sort of nostalgia for the past one of the things Mircea Eliade a pointed out was that what happens to human memory in preliterate cultures because nothing is written down is that what needs to be preserved gets amalgamated and so imagine that you have a culture that's based on fishing let's say so you have to be a good fisherman you know and are human beings you use simple tools to fish are unbelievably good fishermen they know every bloody thing you can possibly imagine about fish because otherwise they die so it's really important that they learn everything about fish and maybe they've been fishing for like 13,000 years or something like that so there's a lot of accumulated knowledge and so then the question is well who taught mankind how to fish and the answer is fragments of individuals across history but not there you know remember the damn fragments you put them all together into the amalgam of the heroic fisherman you know the guy who established the pattern for proper fishing whatever that pattern happens to be one of the patterns might be don't take all the damn fish because there won't be any for the next year or something like that but all those fragments of discovery get amalgamated into heroes of the past and then what you do if you're a fisherman is you act out the heroic fishermen of the past and so the idea that there were men of renown or heroes in the past is just a fragmentary what would you call it's just a fragment of that sequence of ideas that back in the past the remove mighty human beings who established the proper patterns of being and they were the sons of God who took the daughters of men to life now and it's interesting too because we do know that the more confident men are disproportionately likely to leave offspring so it's a perfectly reasonable way of formulating the circumstance onto the flood this is from Virgil a leotta who wrote a book called the history of religious ideas which I would strongly recommend it to three volume set it's quite readable and it's brilliant it's brilliant I I really like it and this is what Ritchie Elias had to say about flood myths as it's been well known since the compilations made by our Andre H Hughes neurons JG Fraser who wrote the Golden Bough the deluge myth the flood minute is almost universally disseminated it is documented on all the continents although very rarely in Africa particularly in the desert for unsurprisingly although and on various cultural levels a certain number of variants seem to be the result of dissemination rather than spontaneous regeneration let's say first from Mesopotamia and then from India it is equally possible that one or several diluvial catastrophes gave rise to fabulous narratives but it would be risky to explain so widespread a myth by phenomena of which no geological traces has been found well Eliot wrote this quite a while ago I think he wrote that book perhaps in the 80s maybe in the 70s but since then there actually has been quite a bit of evidence announced in various circles for the existence of catastrophic floods that occurred within the relative memory of human relative human civilization memory let's say so the West Coast Indians for example I suppose that's the wrong word the West Coast I don't know what to say I know a croc baccala carver who told me a flood story and they have a story it's almost identical to the story of Noah except of course it involves giant canoes but it's it's the same story they release if I remember correctly a raven but Noah releases a raven first and then it dove once once the flood comes to an end and and it has a Tower of Babel issue to the same story so the canoes are all put together it's not one giant canoe it's a bunch of canoes all together be right out the flood and then the can you separate it and go all over the world and that's why there are people all over the world so anyways the story is very widely disseminated but you know there were floods in North America not that long ago so there are floods you can look up the Missoula floods 15,000 to 13,000 years ago and the coracle are people have probably been on the west coast for something like thirteen to fourteen thousand years so and you know you can you can maintain an oral tradition for a very very long time you think no but traditional societies don't change that's where their traditional and so they have the same stories over generations they remember the same stories so when the Missoula floods which were a consequence of melting glacial ice discharged up too they figure there were 55,000 55 of them between 15,000 and 13,000 years ago discharged volumes up to 15 times the volume of the Amazon River so these are major-league floods and then Sears it all published a paper in 2008 called climate change in post-glacial human disperses in Southeast Asia claiming that there were multiple floods particularly affecting Southeast Asia between 15,000 and 7,000 years ago so there might Elliott it might be a bit wrong about the notion that there were no geological traces of such such catastrophic flooding but anyways it doesn't matter because we're still looking at this from a psychological perspective and that's fine the majority of the lugnut seem in some sense to form part of the cosmic rhythm the old world people by a fallen humanity is submerged under the waters and sometime later a new world emerges from the aquatic chaos in large number of variants the flood is the result of the sins or ritual faults of human beings sometimes its results simply from the wish of a divine being to put an end to mankind the chief causes lie at once in the sins of men and the decrepitude of the world it's a brilliant analysis partly because it puts it it draws its lovely parallel between which I mentioned a bit earlier between the fact that things go wrong all by themselves but that you can speed that along by not paying any attention you know so if you're in a relationship you know relationship takes an awful lot of maintenance and you know what it means needs to be maintained because you start developing some distance from the person that you have the relationship with and then that starts to become tinged with a little bit of dislike and hopefully not contempt but a little bit of dislike and maybe some some some emotional distance and you feel that and you think well it's hard to tell what you think but you feel that anyways you know that that's emerged and so then you have a chance at at that point to repair whatever's gone wrong and that would require some retooling on both of your parts maybe one more one person more than the other but whatever we would require a serious discussion like look I've noticed that this has been happening and maybe it's you and maybe it's me and we should probably figure it out because if it was you that be convenient and everything but if it was me then I'd like to fix it because then it would be fixed and so that's why you listen to your partner because they might tell you that there's something stupid about you that you don't know and then if you could fix that then you wouldn't have to be stupid in that way anymore and it's actually one of the real useful it's one of the genuinely useful features of having a partner because you really want to be stupid and then continue to repeat your mistakes ad nauseam for the rest of your life I know it's more convenient to do that than to have a you know knockdown drag them out arguments about just exactly why you're stupid and how you could fix it but still it's better to have the argument so the chief causes lye at once and the sins of man in the decrepitude of the world and the sins there are generally either acts of commission where people do things that they know to be wrong or they fail to do things that they know would be right doesn't really matter sins of commission are usually judged more harshly say within the judeo-christian tradition but I think there might be a bit of an error in that because sins of omission can be a real catastrophe and so here's the flood idea you tell me what you think about this so you know so there's this idea that a judgmental being will flood you out if you continue on your wayward ways and that seems like a little bit of you know it's one of the examples of Jehova being a little on the harsh side in the Old Testament not something that modern people really approve of so much because we like our God sort of domesticated let's put it that way and unfortunately that isn't how it tends to work but I've often thought about the reaction in North America to the hurricane end in New Orleans because there's two ways of reading that right one is Mother Nature has a little fit and sends a hurricane in to New Orleans and wipes everyone out and isn't that a catastrophe and isn't that an example of isn't that example of our fragility in the force in the face of natural power but it is another way of reading it maybe this is unfair but it'll do for the purpose of illustration it's like you know the Dutch build dikes right to keep the ocean back and they're actually pretty effective at that because their countries mostly underwater and it turns out that if you go to Holland it's actually not underwater and so their dikes are working and so the Dutch were very organized people and they better be because their country is supposed to be underwater right so you better be organized if your country is supposed to be underwater and so they are very organized and they have a rule for their dikes which is they try to estimate the worst possible oceanic storm that will come in 10,000 years and make sure that the dikes will withstand that well from my reading the Army Corps of Engineers in New Orleans built the dykes for a storm every hundred years and that's not so good because we live about 80 years let's say so that means the probability that one of those storms is going to come lip and buy in a lifespan is pretty damn high and then so that perhaps wasn't the wisest of planning especially because some of New Orleans is actually supposed to be underwater and then worse you know Mississippi is a state that's quite well known for its corruption and so you might also say the tremendous amount of the money and time and resources that could have and should have and was planned to go towards fixing the problem didn't and so the hurricane came along and oh my god wasn't it a natural disaster and the question is what bloody well makes you so sure that it was a natural disaster right because if the infrastructure would have been maintained and built to the specifications that were certainly technically possible and would have actually been less expensive in the long run to build and everyone knew it and the hurricane came along and way build the city why do you think that's a natural disaster to me that's a that's a natural example if you think about it from a metaphorical perspective of a judgmental god deciding to use a flood to teach a moral lesson and you might say well that's pretty hard what about all those flood survivors at sea I care well the whole flood thing was kind of harsh and so pointing out that there were steps that could have been taken and and also that I dealt in the aftermath have been taken even though everyone knows now exactly what had happened is you might consider it a diagnosis but it's irrelevant because what I'm what I'm really trying to tell you is how the mythological stories would line up on this because you can tell a story about Mother Nature manifesting her catastrophe and potential for tragedy or you can tell another story of an absolute failure of the human social structure and the human individual level because of the corruption to address a problem that everyone knew was there and so that's a good example of how things how the flood comes when you're not behaving properly you know and one of the things that's quite interesting about the Old Testament and the people who wrote it is that they always assume that if the flood comes that meant you weren't prepared if that's the rule right that's it's like the a priori axiom I think you got flooded out hey you weren't prepared enough how can you tell well you got flooded out right that's the evidence and you might say well that's not very fair it's like fair isn't the point the point is do you want to get flooded out again or not because fair would be well you better figure out why you got flooded out and fix it so it doesn't happen again and that's the moral thing to do when you're thinking about morality as walking the path it's most appropriate to get to the destination that you think would be the best possible destination by the mere fact that it exists that is it lives and produces the cosmos gradually deteriorate Syd ends by falling into decay that is the reason why it has to be recreated in other words the flood realizes on the macro cosmic scale what is symbolically affected during the new year festival the end of the world and the end of the sinful humanity in order to make a new creation possible well that's an interesting there's a lot of information packed into those few lines the daily added wrote because he also had in that in the Mesopotamian rituals the Mesopotamians would act out the collapse of the kingdom into chaos essentially at the new year's festival it's kind of what you do when you make resolutions because like it's a degenerate what you'd say is our proclivity to make new year's resolution is sort of a degenerate ritual and I don't mean that it's bad I mean that it's the remnants of something much grander so the idea was well the Mesopotamians would take their Emperor outside the city the walled city and once a year and they would make a meal and they'd take off all his king clothes and then they'd whack them with if I remember correctly the priest would do that and then they make him recount all the ways that he wasn't being a good Emperor that year he wasn't being a good Marduk because that was who he was supposed to be on earth and that's the guy with eyes all the way around his head speaks magic words and transforms chaos into order that's what vampire is supposed to do and so the question would be okay your Emperor it's like have a little humility here because you're not God incarnate you probably made some mistakes can you think of any ways in the last year that you didn't take every advantage of every opportunity you possibly could have to take some spare chaos and transform it into a bit of habitable order that's a good thing to think about well that's what you're thinking about when you make a new year's resolution even though you don't know it it's like well could you be a better person in the upcoming year well you can imagine the flood and then you can set yourself straight and then you can prepare for it and that means maybe you can stave it off but it also means that maybe even if you don't stave it off you could write it out and that's actually the story of Noah because what happens with Noah is that he can see that things are not good and that there's a flood coming and God is maybe letting him know and it says in the story that Noah walked with God remember and that's what Adam did before he got all self-conscious about the whole thing he walked with God we'll talk about that more next time but what that would mean maybe is because Noah was straight and he put himself together and his familial relationships were good because it also says that that his antennae were working and he could see a little farther into the future than someone whose vision was completely obscured by by fog and chaos and he could tell that things were not going to go well and so he prepared for it and because he prepared for it well then things actually went pretty well for Noah even though the flood came and so that's an interesting thing because that's a that's an indeterminant issue in human existence how big a hurricane would it take to wipe out New Orleans everyone was prepared well the you're not going to wipe out the Dutch I mean that's going to be a tough one man you're going to have to conjure up a pretty damn big storm to take out their dikes well how thoroughly defended to New Orleans be if nobody in the Municipal Museum and state governments was corrupt well end of the hurricane probably because that's something that we could clearly deal with we know how to do it and the same applies in your own life is that there are floods coming you can bloody well be sure of that that's absolutely 100% certain some of them are going to be personal some of them are going to be familial some of they're going to be social and political and economic it's like are they going to be catastrophes for you or are you going to ride them out are you going to prepare well the first issue might be well do you have your act together well enough to see them coming with enough advance warning so that you can take proper measures maybe just decide step it maybe just don't go where the flood is going to be that's a simple thing but maybe you don't have that luxury right and so it is going to be a catastrophe maybe someone in your family is going to get really really sick right and maybe maybe there's just a tiny pathway through that that everything doesn't fall apart it doesn't end in divorce it doesn't end in death it doesn't end in sorrow doesn't end in catastrophe but the margin of error is like streaming down to virtually zero and every imperfection that you bring to that situation is going to increase the probability that that tragedy is going to turn into something indistinguishable from hell and that's coming it's coming your way absolutely certainly and so then you might think well since it's coming your way maybe the best thing to do is to put yourself together so that when it comes it can be the least amount of awful possible so I'll close with the story this was a very affecting story for me my mother-in-law had frontal temporal dementia if she developed it quite young she was about 55 something like that and her husband who was very extroverted man-about-town guy I grew up in a small town everybody knew him he was charismatic drank too much charismatic good businessman quite a remarkable person a real character but not exactly a family man even though he provided for his family very well but when his wife got sick he really took care of her man it was something to see because that's no joke dealing with someone who has Alzheimer's for all intents and purposes because they get taken away from you piece by piece and that is not pretty and then it's also hard right not only is it catastrophic but it's hard Jesus he just stepped into that like perfectly and it was way less awful than it could have been Wayne it was just a tragedy it wasn't hell and then I was there when she died and my wife's family are actually pretty good at dealing with death as it turns out my wife's sister is appellative care nurse and you have to be pretty tough cookie to be a palliative care nurse but you can do it which is pretty interesting because that means that you can go make relationships with people at the last stages of their life that are genuine relationships and people just died on you non-stop and yet you know she's a competent alive alert fun person it's like two thumbs up for her man that's someone you can rely on in a tragedy and her other sister is a pharmacist and my wife has volunteered in palliative care wards and is also very good at taking care of people who are genuinely not in good health and so we were there when my mother-in-law died and of course you could imagine here's a here's a deathbed situation for you your mother-in-law is dying and everyone's at each other's throats it's like you think that's uncommon then your eyes aren't open because it's plenty bloody common and then it's not just a tragedy as hell and like maybe you can stand the tragedy but you can't stand the hell and in this situation that is what happens but he pulled together and what happened was well she died but what was so interesting was the family actually came together more tightly as a consequence and so although there was something taken away on the one hand there was something gained on the other that wasn't trivial and I'm not not trying to be all optimistic and you know isn't the universe a wonderful place about all this like someone died in an ugly way and it was harsh but God it was a hell of a lot better than it could have been and maybe it was good enough that's the thing you know is that this is something that I constantly wonder is that if people did what they could to speak the truth and pay attention then maybe the tragedy that's part of life wouldn't have to deteriorate into the unbearable hell that doesn't have to be part of life and maybe we could actually tolerate the tragedy or maybe we could even rise above it or maybe we could even mitigate it you don't because we can we do that sort of thing all the time and so it's always an open question and iliad had put it very well are the floods the consequence of the fact that things fall apart or are the floods of consequence of the fact that people make mistakes that they know they shouldn't make and make anyways they sin right and that's to miss the mark right because that's an archery turn to sin and that means maybe they don't even specify the damn target which is really you're not going to hit it unless you specified or having specified it they just say Oh to hell with it it's not that important it's like you got to be careful when you say something like to hell with it it's not that important because one of the things that might happen to you if you say to hell with it it's not that important is that you might actually end up in hell for a pretty prolonged period of time or maybe for the remainder of your miserable existence because it's certainly the case that people do exist there and I've seen them exist there and once you're there it's no trick it's no simple matter to get the hell out and so it might matter that the things that matter get addressed it might matter that you do what you can to walk with like I said we'll talk more about next time and it might be that that is how you build an ark and are protected from the flood even if the damn thing comes and the thing is it will and this is a funny thing too that I've noticed about our education system and the way we teach students and their trigger warnings and all of that absolute rubbish I think in most of my lectures I'd have to have a trigger warning every 15 seconds so I like how my students when they're young it's like look don't fool yourself you know you're going to develop a serious illness at least one maybe two or three and one of them is likely to be chronic and if it isn't you it's going to be someone you love it's going to be your husband it's going to be your parent it's going to be your kids that's coming and so is a lot of death and Sand pain and so like just exactly what sort of person are you going to be when that shows up and that's the right question it isn't how are you going to be happy in your life it's like good luck with that it's a stupid ambition anyways as far as I'm concerned because it's too shallow you know happiness you're lucky that comes it comes and goes like the Sun coming out from behind the cloud if you're happy man more power to you enjoy it enjoy it it's a it's a gift from the cosmos to be happy but a pursuit no no the pursuit is when the dam flood comes you want to be the person who built Ark and that's what the story of Noah is about and the thing is the flood is always coming that's another thing that's worth commenting on with regards to this story is you know there's an apocalyptic element to the judeo-christian tradition there's an idea that the end of the world is always at hand and that you should prepare to be judged and the thing about that is it's true and the reason it's true is because the end of your world is at hand and it will certainly come and when it comes you will be judged because it will be up to you to figure out what to do with the fact that your world just collapsed and that'll be a moral problem of ultimate severity because it will push you right to your limits and you'll find out exactly where your unaddressed weaknesses lie because that's what happens in a crisis and so the reason that that's an archetypal reality and it lurks underneath the entire judeo-christian structure the apocalypse the impending apocalypse is because we always live in apocalyptic times and your world is always in small ways and large ways coming to an end and so what do you do you prepare for it you prepare for your world to come to an end and then maybe when the end comes you get another world that'd be a good deal so we're ready for this next week my question was regarding the online university you plan to create and yet the plans you up for that mine we've spoke briefly last week and I want to ask you how can a student such as myself get involved with this process yeah well an online University that's a group perhaps a grandiose ambition right but one of the things that so here's my here's my rationale you know lots of things have dramatically transformed in the last 20 years and whole swathes of enterprises being wiped out that's happening in a more and more rapid rate as our technology progresses right now newspapers are in the process of dying I actually think they're in the process of committing suicide but they're in the process of dying and that's going to happen very rapidly I think The Globe and Mail lost 10% of its readership in the last three months something like that and so what happens is that new technologies come along to supplant the old technologies and I've watched a number of businesses fail some large businesses I knew some people who worked at Digital Equipment Corporation when it was failing and I've had some inside track into failing businesses and I see when they start to fail they tend to the failure process tends to cap and then accelerate can have an unbelievably good thing and this is what it looks to me this is how it looks to me in relationship to the universities especially in the US although not only especially in the humanities although not only so number one so I recorded three years of my personality lecture say so let's have three years of lectures on Freud now what I should do with those I think is added them into one really good lecture on Freud and then stop giving that lecture because why would I give that lecture again because I've already given it and it said it events in good shape and if it's a really good lecture then why does someone else have to give the lecture or why does 300 other people have to give a lecture on Freud you know what I mean what's going to happen is there's going to be some really good extras on subjects and that's all that people are going to need or want because the internet tends to move things towards winner-take-all very very rapidly and so it seems to me that we're already at a point technologically where we could identify a hundred things that people really need to know and do a sequence of lectures on those things that we're outstanding and then they could be updated and added to but the den it's like it's a done game and it's free so I know it started thinking about this last year when I noticed that my psychology lectures had a million views and that was last April and I thought that's amazing a million views it's like what the hell that's I don't know what to make of that that's that's the best that's the kind of bestselling book that you never write because no one ever writes a best-selling book so a million views that's something to pay attention to now it's way more than that but there's videos and podcasts and that means that people can listen when you're doing other things too and so that's really cool and maybe people can listen better than they can read that's a real possibility because we've only been really silent Lee for about almost of like most of humanity for less than a hundred years and virtually no one could read silently 500 years ago it's a really new skill and so maybe we're better at listening and so all of a sudden is the possibility of disseminating high-quality educational material highly produced highly vetted to millions of people for nothing well how are you going to compete with that then then it's worse because the humanities which have become completely degenerated almost completely degenerate in my estimation have abandoned their valuable intellectual property which is the collective wisdom at least for the west of Western civilization's just sitting there someone might as well steal it back and then there's the Student Loan debacle in the United States that's pronounced properly debacle debate debacle okay obviously I've read that word more than said it and so you know and so you know I write me today and he asked if you should go to a private college for twenty-two thousand dollars a year to Purdue it pretty is to pursue an undergraduate in in psychology so that he could get into clinical graduate school or go to another University of State University for far less I told them to go to the State University because it's the wise economic decision but you know it doesn't seem to me that it's reasonable at all to load people up when they're 22 with $100,000 of student debt that they cannot declare bankruptcy for it's indentured servitude and the and to load up people when they're 22 or 23 with dead of that magnitude it's like how the hell are they going to be entrepreneurs who are going to take a risk with a hundred thousand dollar debt load and who's going to marry you so really Jesus you know because another story I heard recently was well I just got married to my partner she brought into the marriage one hundred and twenty thousand dollars of student debt it's like oh my god it's like it's crippling man like once you're once you're making a substantial amount of money if you're fortunate maybe you're in your 40s you could handle a dead load like that but in your 20s it's just crippling so you know the tuition fees of Ratt ratcheted up like mad in the last 30 years the unity colleges and universities have become unbelievably administrative leeteuk heavy they're regulated to death by the by the legislative system so there's ethics committees which are so counterproductive that it's just unbelievable there's this entire whole whole new monstrous hyper accommodation movement that it's big borders on I don't eat well I'll make a video about that soon enough it's absolutely pathological and there's this whole postmodern neo-marxist idiocy that's going on in the universities and so like how many mistakes does an Institute Plus students aren't being taught how to speak they're not being taught how to debate they're not being taught how to write and they don't read difficult things they read French intellectual postmodernists right and they probably don't read those either they read secondarily derived pit they skim secondarily derived papers about French intellectual post Marxist post modernist from the 1970s and the standards have been lowered because there's too many people pursuing higher education and so I think okay there's eight dimensions of success and on every single dimension there's failure the system's done the end so the vision would be why not provide everybody in the world with high quality education in the humanities for like 150th the cost you can charge for accreditation that's a whole separate issue right accreditation but that what the resources like why not make them available to everyone so that's the plan I mean I don't know if I can do it or not but it's partly what I'm doing with this biblical lecture series it's sort of putting my toe in the water but I have a plan and I have some good programmers who are willing to help and there's lots of people out there that would help God and be flooded with offers of help I'd love to take people up on the offers but it's not that easy to get someone to help you do something you know it so that'd be the plan it's like so what would the plan be give people a high quality education in the classic humanities teach them how to speak and write accredit them for one tenth the current cost and do it with millions of people instead of tens of thousands some I'm asking what plans Jeff for the accreditation side where people can show something for what's the time these don't watch well one of the things that I would do for example is imagine that you are in a course and so you have taken exam let's say it's a multiple-choice exam just for the sake of argument because they're simpler the writing issue is a separate problem well so one of the things that you would do if you enrolled in the course is generate multiple-choice questions that would be one of your assignments here's a lecture generate 10 multiple-choice questions now you go to thousand people generating 10 multiple-choice questions well then you can do there are statistical procedures that help you figure out what valid multiple choice questions are could have people vote on them for that matter if you put them on a website assignment number two here's a hundred multiple choice questions pick the ten that you think are most representative of the knowledge that you've acquired get a hundred people to do that so you get crowdsource the test construction and then you can keep making the test better and better as well because you could build that I'd like to build the system so that it was self improving with a minimum of administrative interference and so then what would happen is that as you got accredited so you start writing exams and maybe write more and more of them then you'd start to by voting power with regards to the content of the courses and maybe even the right to produce courses to put them up online so it's something like that but our strategy would be to build we want to build a system that's basically autonomous and self-improving right from the beginning so minimum of administrative overhead extremely low cost widespread availability crowd-sourced in its structure and an autonomously self-improving I think we can do that I don't know if I can do it but I think we have the technology to do that and then you think well so here's the plan you know because you're are I'm always thinking of the point point B what what's a good thing to do with life well the good good thing to do with your life is the most difficult god damn you thing you can think of that would do the most possible good that'll get you up in the morning and so because you think why should I get up in the morning it's like well you know I've got 50 million people to educate hey that'll do it really you know that's that battle that will overcome a lot of eggs that's sort of thinking so well so it seems to me that it seems to me that it's inevitable now whether or not I can do it that's a whole different story but I can certainly start it and I'm going to start it my partner my business partner the guy who helped me develop the self authoring program which thousands of people are using that now and we've helped thousands of thousands of students now stay in the university so that's really cool well maybe not given the state of the university I'm contributing to the problem but you know but they're but they're sticking out their plans that's the point they're actually making plans and sticking them out so so I think that we can and we know how to start small with because the way to build a big system is to build a small system that works and then scale it and so that's I've been talking with my partner his name is Daniel Higgins another partner Bob Peel he used to be my graduate supervisor at McGill and we've been working on this sort of thing for about 25 years and our goal being right from the beginning to build low-cost high-quality psycho-educational interventions and bring them to as wide a market as possible so and then my and Daniel in particular has devoted most of his life to doing that it's been about 20 years now so so well that's a sketch of it all outline more of it on the web at some point but that's kind of what's what we've been deciding what we've been planning to do yep look when you were on the Rubin report not too long ago in that discussion you mentioned how use of psilocybin straightens people out and can produce these transcendent experiences which is jarring for a person who may have personally wanted lesion that on the rubin which were happy with for someone who became a christian as a result of their only time doing magic mushrooms was during piece of information I was just wondering if you could expand on what you find intriguing about religious experience and what we can know about the transcendent from them if anything that's a tough one man um the relationship between entheogen accuse let's say which is sometimes what those chemicals are described and religious experience is unspecified but it looks like it's profound there was a man named Gordon was saw who wrote a book I remember correctly called soma he was investigating the potential use of Hema NIDA muscaria mushrooms among the people who wrote the Hindu holy scriptures thousands of years ago and he felt that he identified the chemical that they were using the sacred drink the use of ayahuasca and psilocybin mushrooms and so forth is well-documented particularly in North America and the evidence the empirical evidence that under certain conditions those chemicals can produce religious experiences is absolutely overwhelming that has been good research done recently at Johns Hopkins looking at psilocybin the first research that's been done on hallucinogens really in 30 years because people were so terrified of them in the 60s and for good reason indicated that the people that they dosed with psilocybin about 75 percent of them had a mystical experience which they regarded as one of the five three to five most important experiences of their life and a year later were characterized by a permanent personality transformation which was an increase in trade openness of one standard deviation which is a lot by the way it moves you from 50th percentile to 85th percentile for example it's a huge move and that looked permanent now whether or not that's a good thing that's a whole different issue but they're very very powerful and they also did some recent research showing that psilocybin mushrooms were an unbelievably effective smoking cessation intervention so if I remember correctly and I may have this wrong because it's been awhile since I read it an 80% success rate in stopping people from using tobacco with one psilocybin experience and so well so those things are very all of that's very interesting to me and I don't exactly know what make of it I don't know what to make of it at all not even a little bit but but the evidence for the relationship between met mystical experiences and hallucinogen use of certain types is incontrovertible and I don't and I don't think anybody else knows what to derive from that I mean one conclusion is something like religious experiences are a common concomitant of going temporarily insane and that it's not a bad hypothesis because you see for example in the prodrome of illnesses like schizophrenia and sometimes manic depressive disorder - on a mannequin you do see the emergence often of religious type delusions it's not that common but it's not uncommon so it's definitely the case that if your brain function has been detrimental E affected one of the consequences can be experiences that are subjectively experienced as indistinguishable from the religious you also see the same thing in cases of epilepsy especially in the prodromus so if you have an epileptic condition sometimes you know that you're going to have a seizure you can feel it mounting and often or at least occasionally those experiences are associated with an elevation of religious sensation deepening meaning that increases in its depth and complexity until it's overwhelming and that's what subjectively brings on the seizure now god only knows how to disentangle causality in this circumstance like that Dostoevsky had seizures like that by the way so so that the the pessimistic viewpoint is religious phenomenology is a consequence of brain disorder the positive side more positive side is no religious experience is a category of experience that's within the realm of human possibility and there are different modes of eliciting it and we know that there are many modes of eliciting it's stinkin elicited dancing under some circumstances music and elicited music elicits it regularly I mean basically as far as I'm concerned rock concerts are indistinguishable from religious rituals their rituals not like they don't come with dogmatic overlay let's say but the ritualistic structure is there and maybe it's there just listening to music what that means for the investigation of hallucinogens I have no idea and I would also certainly use the caution that Carl Jung developed when he was talking about hallucinogens and he did that I think only a very brief number of times and I think in relationship to Aldous Huxley's original work on mescaline experiences he said beware of wisdom that you didn't earn and that's very very smart so I would say there's something to be learned about there's something there's a lot to be learned about hallucinogens there may be something to be learned from them but having said that if you play with fire you end up burnt generally speaking so all due caution is in effect so one more I know you're now the Flex Lee fan so I thought I'd ask you this question after reading his book doors of perception in which he gives an account of his experience taking the psychedelic drug mescaline he stated that in the final stages of egolessness there is an obscene knowledge that all isn't all that all was actually each he then went out to say that this is as near I take it as a finite mind can ever get to perceiving everything that is happening in the universe I was wondering if maybe you could explain what that means because I've been trying to understand it for a monster there's the neuroscientist a while back his name I don't remember who had a stroke and she being a neuroscientist was analyzing the neurological consequences of the stroke as it occurred if I remember correctly the stroke either temporarily or more permanently took out the function of large portions of her left hemisphere and she had exactly that experience it was an experience of ego dissolution something like that that the the felt sense of identity shifting from that sort of narrow boundaries maybe that you would define by the boundary of your physical being into something that was much broader and much like it gets it gets it gets hard to describe this without you know degenerating into hippy poetry from 1967 very very rapidly but it's something like a sense a sense of of the underlying unity of consciousness that might be one way of thinking about we don't know much about consciousness in fact I don't think we know anything about consciousness and obviously consciousness is something that we all share but it's also something that we seem to also experience individually but maybe our individual consciousnesses are something like the manifestations of something that's a more unified consciousness underneath I mean that's hardly an original idea but it does seem to be the case that under some circumstances there are neurological transformations that make that link more apparent assuming that the link exists now you could say well no they're just producing a delusion but the funny thing about you know funny thing about delusions is that you've got to think well how do you know something's a delusion and the answer that has to be like something like well hardly anyone else thinks that that would be criterion number one but criterion number two would be if you act on the delusion does your ship sink because if your sip sinks then it was a delusion it's some like that but if you act on your delusion and things get better well then maybe it wasn't a delusion and there's no evidence from the psilocybin studies that have been conducted at Johns Hopkins that there was detrimental effects for the participants and the participants certainly don't think the day effects are detrimental so and I've been hesitant to talk about any of this for obvious reasons haha I'll tell you something really funny I think it's funny anyways I had Timothy Leary's old job at Harvard so you know and so Leary is a good object lesson and being very careful about this sort of thing because it certainly it isn't obvious that his net effect was good and I say that with some caution because Leary was a very smart person and he was very creative but he got tangled up in that hallucinogenic madhouse you know that that characterized the say the period from 1965 to about 1970 and it didn't seem to me that that was altogether a good thing thing is we have these chemicals now in our culture and people are experimenting with them like mad and making them illegal doesn't seem to be working in large part because there I think there were seven known seven to twenty known psychoactive substances that were illegal in the year 2000 there's something like 400 now because labs all over the world keep tweaking the molecules right because molecule a is illegal so chemists just shifted a little bit and they have a new hallucinogen and which might be fine and might not be because now and then you can produce a chemical that's unbelievably dangerous fentanyl sort of like that there was a drug a while back that I could name I can't remember the name it was an acronym it was a fun drug if you took it once it gave you permanent irreversible total Parkinson's disease so people would take it and they were frozen and that was it so MPTP I think it was called so because it destroyed the same area of the brain that that Parkinson's destroys accepted in it right away so you know designer drugs right a little caution is in order how we might approach the issue of hallucinogen use in a mature manner well that's a topic for an entirely other discussion I'm not even necessarily sure that it can be approached that way although I would say at minimum determining what it is that you're up to if you're going to experiment would be a good thing like what is it exactly that you're serving they're not party drugs and not for fun right whatever they are that's not what they're for and so maybe they could be used by people who are carefully orienting themselves towards the good although I wouldn't say that that should be read as a recommendation thank you yep the theory next week thank you thank you so I look today and these lectures have now been watched by they've been viewed a million times so that's pretty amazing freely or they've been they've been glanced at a million times that's right that's also possible all right so well let's get right into it so last week I think was mostly remarkable for the absolute dearth of content that was actually biblically related so that was I'll just recap what I laid out and so that it sets the frame properly for what we're going to discuss tonight and I presented you with an elaborated description of of this diagram essentially which I spent quite a lot of time formulating probably about 25 years ago I guess which kind of accounts for its graphic primitiveness I suppose I was really pushing the limits of my 486 computer to produce that I can tell you so and it's it's it's a it's a description representation of the archetypal circumstances of life and and the archetypical circumstances are the circumstances that are true under all conditions for all time and so you can think about them as descriptively characteristic of the nature of human experience that's not exactly the same as the nature of reality but because you can you can divide reality into its subject of an object of elements and and there's utility in doing that but these sorts of representations don't play that game that they consider human experience as constituted constitutive of reality and that's how we experience it and so we'll just go with that the idea basically is is that we always exist inside a damaged structure and that structure is partly biological and it's it's partly socio-cultural it's partly what's been handed to us by our by our ancestors both practically in terms of infrastructure but also psychologically in terms of the active learned content of our of our psyches and so that would include for example our ability to utilize language and the words that we use and the phrases that we use and the mutual understanding that we develop as a consequence of interacting with each other architect Lee speaking that structures always it's always dead and corrupt and the reason it's dead is because it was made by people who are dead and the reason it's corrupt is because things fall apart of their own accord and the fact that people don't aim properly let's say speeds along that process of degeneration and so what that means and I think this is something worth knowing maybe I'll try standing back here and see if that problem goes away what that means is that young people always have a reason to be upset and cynical about the current state of affairs and and it's that way forever and so it's useful I think to consider such considerations sort of such conceptualizations of the pair of the as the patriarchy in that light because it's an archetypal truth that the social structure is corrupt and incomplete and and what that means is that it's something that you have to contend with every moment in some sense of your life it's a it's a permanent fact of existence and to be upset that the structures of social structures or even the biological structures within which we live are incomplete and imperfect is to and to take that personally that that's the worst part of it to take that person out personally is a misreading of the existential condition of humankind because it's always the case that what you have been given and what you live in is degenerate and corrupt and in need of repair and it's easier just to accept that because there's also a positive development and the pause development as well you've been granted something rather than nothing and maybe you haven't been granted pure hell because especially in a culture like ours where many things actually function quite well so there's room for gratitude there even if it's a broken machine it's not one that's completely devastated and it's not absolutely hell-bent at every second on your misery and destruction and it easily could be because many societies are like that and so the fact that we happen to live in one that isn't corrupt beyond imagining is something to be eternally grateful for well so we live inside a damaged structure and we also bear responsibility for that damage because we don't do everything we can to constantly repair it and you might say well that's actually one of the fundamental you know people say well what's the meaning of life what they really mean is what's the positive meaning of life because as we've already discussed the negative meanings of life are more or less self-evident well the positive meaning of life is to be found in noting the state of lack of repair of the of the walled city that you inhabit and then sallying forth to do something about that to repair the breaches and to fix up the walls and to make the structure that you inhabit as secure and as productive as it possibly can be and there's no shortage of opportunities to do that you can do that in your own mind you can do that in your own room you can do that in your own household in your local community you and maybe if you get good at doing it at all those levels then you can start to look beyond that and so there's challenges that's the thing that's kind of interesting about this insufficient structure is that it has a set of challenges built into it because of its insufficiency and perhaps even because of its corrupt nature that calls forth the potential response from you of heroic adventure and the heroic adventure is to man the barricades and repair the city and you can always do that it doesn't matter what's what your personal circumstances are there's always something that isn't right near you isn't correct isn't laid out properly that you could just fix if you wanted to and one of the things that we're going to talk about tonight is the idea that if you adopt the attitude an attitude that's like that that the rule that you should play is to make things better wherever you are however you can that what would actually happen would be that things would get better wherever you are in all sorts of ways and that we've really as a species you might say or maybe even as singular individuals we we've explored that rarely it isn't something that's put forth as a proposition that often and it's quite surprising to me and you know I had an interesting experience the other day I went to the keg I go there because I have food allergies and they're very careful with people who have food allergies and the waiter took me to the table and he said that he had been watching my lectures and that's a very common experience and he was happy about that and he said that he had two promotions at the keg in the last four months because he'd been watching my lectures and like I really found that an affecting experience because you know you might say well he's working as a waiter at the keg and there's nothing particularly heroic about that and and I disagree with that actually because I don't care where you're located you can do a hell of a job and I mean that literally at whatever job you have you can you can take whatever job you have and you can make it a real nice little piece of absolute misery or you can do you can act like a civilized human being and notice that no matter where you are there's a there's a richness and a complexity that's completely inexhaustible right at hand and then you can take that seriously and you can say well I happen to be a waiter at the keg and perhaps that's not what I expected and he's a young guy and perhaps that isn't where I want to end up but it's not nothing that's a rich environment and I can make it a lot better if I want to I can get along properly with my co-workers and not gossip behind their back and I can treat my customers properly and if an opportunity comes my way I can take it and I can see what happens and so he said that's what he had started doing and that things were working out much better for him he was in a much better job than he was three months ago in three months that's nothing right I mean that's a nice trajectory it's an uphill trajectory and that's what you want really an uphill trajectory is actually even better than being somewhere good as far as I'm concerned because one of the things that really makes your life meaningful is the clear realization that you're headed somewhere better than you are now and then it's even better if you also understand that there's a direct causal relationship between the things that you're doing and the steepness of that incline and so I get a lot of letters from people like that and they're Marse most frequently young men although not always and they say well you know I've been listening to these lectures and I decided that I'm going to try to take responsibility for my life and so I'm I've started to stop doing all the stupid things that I know that that are stupid that I know I shouldn't be doing and I've started doing some of the things that aren't stupid that I know I should be doing which seems pretty obvious really if you think about it but it's obvious though it may be that isn't necessarily what people do and then they write and say you can't believe what difference that makes and they're thrilled about it and so I'm thrilled about it when I get letters like that because I really don't experience anything as better than a letter like that or a message like that because it's so good to see things that aren't so good replaced by something better and I really do think it's an open question I truly believe it's an open question to what degree we could make things better if that's what we actually aimed at doing you know in some of the stories that we've we've come already the story of Cain and Abel in particular is really an analysis of that problem which so remarkable it occurs so so early in this document it's such a such a foundational story and it basically says well there's two modes of being in the world right there's one where you adopt the responsibility for living properly for being properly and you make the sacrifices necessary for doing that and then everything will flourish properly and the other one is a pathway of resentment and bitterness and rejection and murder and genocide and that just seems exactly right to me and so if the positive path beckons if you can actually see what it is if you can if you can lower yourself enough to see what it is young Carl Jung said once that modern people didn't see God because they didn't look low enough so phrase I really really like because people denigrate the opportunities that are right in front of them and there's no reason to do that because what's right in front of you is the majesty of being that's what's right in front of you it's inexhaustibly complex and full of potential and there's no reason to assume that wherever you happen to be isn't as good a starting place as anywhere else now you know I know some people have terrible terrible lives in situations that are absolutely unbearable and but I also do know that even situations like that can be made a hell of a lot worse by the bad by by the worst kind of attitude that's for sure so so anyway so that's where you are you're in a damaged structure you're a damaged structure you're in a damaged structure but you know at least it's got some walls you know you're not being fed to the Lions on a regular basis so that's a good thing and you can you can emerge forward you know heroically magically to confront the chaos that constantly threatens the structure within which you live and you can free something as a consequence of that you can learn something you can strengthen yourself that's the other thing because the way what you're actually made of in many ways that what informs you what you're made of is what you encounter when you voluntarily encounter the unknown and so the more you voluntarily encounter the unknown the more you get may and the more you get made of the more there is to you and then the more you're good at encountering the unknown and restructuring order and and calling forth proper order out of the potential of being and God you got to think why wouldn't you do that since you can do that and it's an endless mystery you know I think part of it is that people well it's also encapsulated to stump some degree in the story of Adam and Eve because what happens to Adam is when he becomes self conscious right he becomes ashamed of himself and regards himself as a lowly sort of creature and there's endless reasons why people would do that because of course we're rife with imperfection and so he hides from God and I think that's actually the answer to the conundrum which is that people don't aspire to the highest good because they're deeply ashamed of themselves and their weaknesses and their insufficiencies and and so it's it's that's not the only reason I mean there's the desire to avoid responsibility and there's all the negative motivations as well like resentment and and and hatred and the desire to make things worse I don't want to you know give us a give us too much of a break but but it's something like that but it's okay then to not be in a very good place if what you're trying to do with that not very good place is make it better and one of the things I really have learned as a clinical psychologist is that you just cannot believe how powerful incremental progress is you could you can do the calculations like it's like compound interest you know if you make your life a tenth of a percent better a week man in two or three years you're in such a better place than you were that it isn't even like the same domain and if you keep that up for ten years or twenty years you know especially if you're young and you start early you start to straighten yourself out and and fix the things that you can fix you can transform your lives in ways that are completely unimaginable and god only knows what the upper limit of that is in terms of human possibility because we are amazing creatures you know when we really get our act together and stop running at 10% of our capacity you know so so so that's what you do you've got you know the fact that things aren't exactly the way they should be at least gives you something to do ooh you know and that's that's and and and maybe something great to do because there's no shortage of suffering in trouble that'd be sets the world that you could conceivably ameliorate in some way and the utility and meaning the utility of that and the intrinsic meaning of that is self-evident so it also makes me curious about nihilism for example and despair because I mean I understand those emotions I understand them deeply and the intellectual mindset that goes along with it but they just seem beside the point to me in some sense because there are so many things that need doing that all you really have to do is open your eyes and look at them and then decide that you're actually going to do something about them and you might think well what's within my scope of influence is so trivial that it's not worth doing it's like it won't stay trivial for long if you do it not at all and I don't think it's trivial to begin with I don't think that any I really don't believe that anything done right is trivial and my experience in my life has been that anything I actually did paid off it didn't pay off necessarily in the way that I expected it to pay off that's a whole different story but if it was genuine commitment to do something even if it went sideways and the outcome was really something other than what I expected the net consequence over time was nothing but good so every new frontier that can be conquered is an advance forward and there's no shortage of frontier because we're surrounded by the unknown we're surrounded by our own ignorance and we can continually move into that domain into the domain of chaos or we can restructure pathological order and that's that's the secret to proper being and so then you encounter chaos that way you know and then you can regard yourself as the sort of entity that despite its insufficiency has the capability to conquer chaos despite the danger of that that's the other thing because the fact that you're fragile is actually a precondition for your heroism because if you weren't fragile then there'd be nothing heroic about doing something difficult right because if you couldn't be hurt or damaged or defeated or or end up in failure then where's the where's the moral courage in the endeavor it has to be that the agility is built into the courage and so it's not it's not a reason not to engage in it at all in fact quite the contrary and so well and so then you know what do you do well you put the city back together and maybe the way you want it so that it's functional and efficient and beautiful and so the people can flourish there and and and flourish in a manner that makes them like it makes them what would you say that makes them feel that the unbearable catastrophe of being is worth it for the experience that's what you're aiming at and it's not an impossibility it's not an impossibility and then not only that not only do you repair the city when you do that but you make yourself the sort of thing that continually repairs the city and that's even better that's the end goal because it's not the repair of the city that's the goal it's the transformation of yourself into the thing that continually repairs the city and so there's just no reason for that not to happen and the more it can happen the better well there's a there's an undercurrent to this story and that is also the story of the flood and that's the fact that you know the city can become corrupt because people don't engage in heroic endeavor or perhaps because they engage in precisely the opposite of that which is outright destructive behavior and this is also something that's worth considering too because if you if you if you consider your your own manner of being you know you can say things to people like tell tell the truth and be good and those aren't those are cliches obviously and so they lack power because they're cliches but you can take them apart and utilize them in a manner that stops being a cliche and you do that by being more humble about them I would say because maybe you can't tell the truth because you don't know what the truth is but one thing you can do is you can stop saying things that you know to be untrue and you might say well how do I know that they're untrue and the answer to that is well you need a whole philosophy of truth the elaboration of an entire philosophy of truth to answer that question and so we're not going to bother answering that question because in some sense at the moment it's beside the point that isn't the issue the issue is there are times in your life where you know that the thing that you're saying is not true it's a deception it's a lie of some sort and you're using it to manipulate yourself or another person or the world and you're also possessed fully possessed of the idea that you can get away with it and there's a satanic arrogance about that in fact that is the archetypal arrogance that's portrayed in the mythological character of Satan because Satan is precisely the archetype of the element of the mind that believes that it can twist and and bend the structure reality without paying the price for that and you can't imagine anything that's more arrogant than not because really do you really think that you can twist the structure of a reality and that that's going to work out for you without it snapping back it's so obvious that that can't work that that everyone knows it but anyways back to the initial point is that you know by the rules of the game that you yourself are playing that some of the times you're violating the rules of the game that you're playing and the first issue with regards to say stating the truth or behaving in a responsible manner would be merely stopped cheating at whatever game it is that you've chosen to play that's a good start and that'll straighten that will straighten out your life it'll start in the straight and start to straighten out your life and so well the flood what the hell does the flood tie into this well you know we live in a corrupt structure we're corrupt as individuals we live in a corrupt structure and part of that corruption has just happenstance it's the way things fall apart but the other part of it is that not only are we not aiming up we're actually aiming down and the flood story is a warning and it's a very clear warning and the warning is if you aim down enough and then if enough of you aim down at the same time everything will degenerate into something that's indistinguishable from the chaos from which things emerged at the beginning of time it's something like that because the the cosmos that's presented in mythological representations is chaos versus order right the order is on top you might say and the chaos is always underneath and the chaos can break through or the order can crumble and you can fall into the chaos and that chaos is intermingle intermingled potential and the way that you destroy the order and let the chaos rise back up which is exactly how its portrayed in the flood story is by well by inhabiting the corpse of your father that's one mythological motif and feeding on the remains and with no gratitude and no attempt to replenish what it is that you're taking from and the warning in the flood story is don't do that for very long because things will happen that are so awful you cannot possibly imagine it and that will happen to you personally and it'll happen to your family and it will happen to your community and it's happened to people over and over throughout history and it's quite interesting you know it's very soon after the story of Cain and Abel when you see evil enter the world in the story of Adam and Eve along with self-consciousness and evil there is the ability that's the knowledge of good and evil that's the ability to hurt other people self-consciously to know what you're doing and then of course instantly Cain takes that to the absolute extreme and he uses that capacity to to destroy really what he loves best he gets as close as a human being can to destroying the divine ideal because of course his brother is able and Abel is favored by God and Cain destroys them which Cain tells God at the end of that episode that his punishment is more than he can bear and I think the reason for that is where are you once you destroy your own ideal what's left for you there's nowhere to go there's no up and when there's no up there's a lot of down and you know there's an idea that was put forth very nicely in Milton's Paradise Lost when he was describing from a psychological perspective essentially what hell is and hell is you're in hell to the degree that you're distant from the good that that might be a good way of thinking about it and if you destroy your own ideal which you do with jealousy and resentment and and the desire to pull down people who you would like to be let's say then you end up in a situation that's indistinguishable from hell and the way the story the biblical story unfolds as well it's it's it's Cain and then it's the flood and so Cain adopts this mode of being that's antithetical to being itself at least a positive being itself he does it voluntarily does it knowing full well what he's doing and the net consequence of this that as it ripples through the entire social structure is that God stands back and says this whole thing is God so bad the only thing we can do is is wipe it to the ground and that is that is no joke that's exactly how things work and one of the things that's extraordinarily terrifying about that sequence of stories and I believe this to be true I think I realized this independently of any of the analysis that I was doing of mythological stories because I looked at what happened in places like the Soviet Union and Mao's China and in Nazi Germany and the most penetrating observers of those societies the people who were most interested in how it was that those absolute catastrophes came about all said the same thing it was rooted in the degeneration of the individuals who made up the society you know you hear what people will thought were following orders it's like no that that explanation doesn't hold water or that you'd be punished if you resisted well there is some truth in that but nowhere near as much as people might think especially at the beginnings of the process more it was that people decided each and every one of them to turn a blind eye to the catastrophes and to participate in the lies and that warped the entire societies and they went as you know they they feared their way downward to something as closely approximating hell as you could hope to manage especially in places like Nazi Germany and well in all three of those places and in Mao is China and in the Soviet Union and so the thing that's so frightening about one of the things that's so frightening about the stories in Genesis is they say something very clear which is that your moral degeneration contributes in no small way to the degeneration of the entire cosmos you say well I would like my life to be meaningful people say that really would you really you really would like your life to be meaningful you think maybe people would made a little nihilism to not have to face that particular realization and I think people do that all the time it's a terrible way to to to realize but we are networked together in that that's the price of or let's say that's the vulnerability that's associated with our intense capacity to communicate and it is certainly possible that the ripples of our individual actions have consequences that are far beyond the limits of our immediate consciousness and I also think people know that too they know that in the way that people know things when they don't want to know them which means they know them embodied they can feel them they can sense them they have an emotional response to them but there's no damn way they're going to let them become articulate because they don't want to know and when you're feeling guilty and ashamed about the things you've done or not done and I know that can get out of hand as well it's often because there is a crooked little part of you that's aiming at the worst possible outcome you know one of the things you said about the shadow you know that young famous idea that everyone has a dark side and that that dark side needs to be incorporated and made conscious young said the shadow of the human being reaches all the way to hell and he actually that's the thing that's so interesting about interesting about reading Carl Jung is he actually means what he says it's not a metaphor it's like the part of you that's twisted against being is aligned with the part of the cosmos let's say the conscious cosmos that's aiming at making everything as terrible as it can possibly be and you know it's a terrible shock to realize that it's partly why people don't realize that it's it's something that people keep at an arm's length it's it's the same as recognizing yourself as a Nazi concentration camp camp guard which is a very useful exercise because there's absolutely no reason why you couldn't have been or still could be one so and if you think otherwise then all the more reason for assuming that you would be unable to resist the temptation if it was in fact offered to you and if you don't think it's a temptation then the then there's so much that you don't know about human beings that you're not even in the game because if it wasn't a temptation then people bloody well wouldn't have done it and plenty of people did it and it's no wonder so so things get serious in Genesis very very rapidly and and the depth of the seriousness is ultimate archetypal that's it gets as serious as it can get the story of Noah and the flood opens in a fragmentary manner and I believe that these passages are part of a longer story that we only have bits and pieces of and an also one that's fragmented in its in its it its parts of more than one story and it starts like this it came to pass when men began to multiply on the face of the earth and and and daughters were born unto them that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair and they took them wives of all which they chose now there's an idea there there's two ways of looking at the past and you can kind of see that in the political landscape that we inhabit now on the more conservative end of the spectrum people regard the past as the land of giants right there were the heroes of the past who established the current conditions that we exist in and then the people on the left are more concerned perhaps with the what would you call it with a lineage of corruption that's come down through the centuries and both of those perspectives are accurate you can say well there were there there were the great heroes of the past who established our modes of being you can think of them as composite beings if you want that's fine that's a perfectly reasonable way of thinking about it and you can also think of the of the accumulation of corruption and evil that's come along the centuries as well and so you see both of those reflected in these initial few lines that the sons of gods so those are the hero's saw the daughters of men that they were fair and they took them wives of all of which they chose then this statement comes in and somewhat of a non sequitur and the Lord said my spirit shall not always strive with man for that he is also flesh yet his days shall be a hundred and twenty years and I looked at a variety of interpretations of that line because it doesn't seem to follow so clearly from the previous line and exactly what it means isn't obvious but it seems to be the first line talks about the heroes of the past and and the second line says wait a second there's something corrupt about the human mode of being and one of the consequences of that as far as God is concerned is that there are conditions under which the divine Spirit will not strive with man what that means is there are conditions under which let's say the I don't think there's any other way of putting it is the divine impulse towards the good will abandon you because of things that you've done and then the secondary consideration here is that perhaps because of the degeneration of people it's not so obvious here that our life spans are limited that the spirit that inhabits us will only do so for a limited amount of time and that's tangled in a strange way in with the idea of human moral culpability and that's posed against the notion of the Giants of the past and then it returns to the giant idea the narrative returns to the giant idea and reads there were giants in the earth in those days and also after that when the sons of men came in unto the daughters of men and they bare children to them and the same became mighty men which were of old men of renown and that's the end of that sequence of fragments it's it's very broken but you can see a dual narrative underneath it and and one of the narratives is that there's the kind of corruption despite the joy the nature of the Giants of the past there's the kind of corruption lurking that would cause God to with hold his grace and allow men to deteriorate and and that sets the stage for Noah and the flood and God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth and that the and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually you know one of the things I really didn't like about going to church when I was a kid I went to a pretty moderate church it was the United Church which has hardly even become a church now it's so moderate so to speak one of the things I didn't like was the constant harping by the Ministry on the sinful nature of human beings like it didn't speak to me properly partly because I really didn't understand what it meant and partly because it seemed well sort of what would you say was self-flagellating in an unattractive way I don't know if there is an attractive way to be self-flagellating but it was it was and there was something about it there was also wrote and and faked that I didn't like but you know in later years I thought about that more and I started to understand that there was some real utility in asking people to keep the evil that they're doing clear and conscious in the forefront of their imagination I think I mentioned to you guys last week this little episode from what we know of Mesopotamian culture surrounding the emperor the new year's festival they would take the emperor outside of the walled city and strip him of his garb so that he was reduced to just an ordinary man and then humiliate him richly and then ask him how it was over the last year that he wasn't a spectacular embodiment of Marduk and Marduk was the Mesopotamian deity who made order out of chaos essentially and the emperor was supposed to sit and think okay well you know I'm Emperor and everything I should be doing a good job maybe I should even be doing a great job and probably I'm coming up short in a bunch of ways and that actually happens to be important since I'm running the entire show I should be very very cognizant of how I'm failing to live up to the ideal and that is what that call that constant clarion call that's degenerated I would say an institutional Christianity that was actually the idea was look there's a bunch of ways that you're not being everything you could be and it is not supposed to be a whip to knock you down although maybe it's a whip to knock down your pride the pride that stops you from being aware of your insufficiencies it's more like a call to the opposite it's like well you should stop doing those things because you could be so much more than you are and that would be so much better for you and everyone else that it's just it's just not good that you continue doing these things continue breaking your own rules let's say because we could certainly as I said we can start this game by assuming that you should at least play the game that you're playing straight and so and it is the case that if you watch yourself it's a terrifying thing to do but if you watch yourself you'll see you lie a lot like when I learned this to begin with I was in my 20s and I was I'm a smart person and I was very proud of that because I was also a small person I was moved ahead one year in school and I was a small person to begin with and so I was a very small person in my classes and also very mouthy which might not come as much of a surprise and somewhat provocative and so you know and I got pushed around a fair bit because P everybody gets pushed around and my weapon was to be mouthy and it was a fairly effective weapon although it tended to backfire because you know if you're really effectively mouthy with large obnoxious people then they tend to respond in a relatively negative physical way and so that sort of thing was happening to me a fair bit and but I was quite I was quite proud of the fact that I was that I I was I had some intellectual power and that it was then in my 20s when I learned about some of the danger of that because I started to read partly Milton's Paradise Lost and I started to understand the the danger of the intellect and the danger of the intellect as far as I can tell is that it tends towards pride and arrogance and it also tends to fall in love with its own productions and so that's actually Lucifer in Paradise Lost absolu suffer Lucifer is the intellect that falls in love with its own productions and then assumes that there's not outside of what it thinks that's the totalitarian mentality right it's like we have a total system and we know how everything works and we're going to implement it and that'll bring about heaven on earth right that's that's a that that's the totalitarian mindset and that's associated with intellectual arrogance and another at the same time another thing what was happening to me so I was noticing that I started to understand what that meant and I also started to understand that there was more to life than the intellect much more if I smoke too much and I drank too much and I weighed like 130 pounds I wasn't in good physical shape and like I had a lot of things to do when I went to graduate school to put myself together and at the same time I was trying to understand why things had gone so crazily wrong with the world its encapsulation in the Cold War and what role I might be playing in that if any or what role any of us were playing in that at the same time I was working out of prison only a little bit I worked with this crazy psychologist he he is to put jokes on his multiple-choice tests he was a really eccentric guy but I really liked his courses he and he taught a course on creativity and he was also a prison psychologist and he was an eccentric guy and he for some reason like me and maybe because I was eccentric too and he invited me to go out to the Edmonton maximum-security prison with him a couple of times which I did and that was a very interesting experience because I was trying to figure out what role each individual's behavior bore to the pathology of the group was something like that and I went out there and I met a little guy smaller than me I was a little bigger by then and he was a pretty innocuous guy and what had happened was I was out in this gymnasium it looks like a high school the prison which is really quite telling in my estimation but and there were all these like monsters in there weightlifting and like they were monsters I remember one guy who was tattooed everywhere and he had like a huge scar running down the middle of his chest it looked like someone had to hit him with an axe and you know and and I was in there I had this weird cape that I used to wear that I bought in Portugal and some boots that went along with it and yeah I was like an 1890s Sherlock Holmes cape and it was really like it was from the 1890s because this little village was up on a hill it was a walled city on a hill and they sold these things and I don't think they changed the style since 1890 and so I thought they were really cool and so I was wearing that which wasn't perhaps the most conservative garb to dawn if you're going to wear if you're going to go to a maximum-security prison so anyways I was in the gymnasium and the car the psychologist left and god only knows I mean that's what he was like and all these guys came or all these guys came around me you know and they were offering to trade their prison clothes for my tape and was it was like I was being made an offer I couldn't refuse you know and so I didn't I didn't really know what to do and then this little guy said something like that the psychologist sent me to come and take you away or something like that and so I thought well better this little guy banned all these monsters so we went outside the gym through some doors like school doors went outside the gym into the exercise yard I guess and we were wandering along and he was talking to me and he seemed like a kind of an innocuous guy and then the psychologist showed up at the door and motioned us back and so which was kind of a relief and so I went into his office and he said you know that guy that you walked out in the yard with and I said yeah he said he he took two cops one night and he had them kneel down and while they were begging for their lives he shot them both in the back of the head and I thought hmm that's see the thing that was so interesting was that he was so innocuous right because what you'd hope is that someone like that would be very much unlike you let's say and certainly wouldn't be like someone innocuous that you'd met what you'd want is that the guy would be like you know half were wolf and half vampire so you could just tell right away that he was a cold-blooded killer but no he was this sort of ineffectual little guy who was certainly not ineffectual if you gave him a revolver in the upper hand and so so that made me think that made me think a lot about the relationship between being innocuous and and being dangerous and then another thing happened I met another guy out there and then a week or two later I heard that he and a friend of his had held another guy down and pulverized his left leg with a lead pipe like just pulverized it and the reason for that was that they thought that he was a snitch and maybe he was and at that time I did something different instead of being shocked and horrified by that although I certainly was I thought how in the world could you do that because I didn't think I could do that I didn't think that I thought that there was a qualitative distinction between me and those people and so I spent about two weeks trying to see if I could figure out under what conditions I could do that like what kind of psychological transformation I would have to undergo to be able to do that and so that was a meditative exercise let's say and it only took about ten days for me to realize that not only could I do that it would be a hell of a lot easier than I thought it would be and that's sort of where that wall between me and what being described as the shadow started to fall apart and that also was very useful because I started to wreck I started to treat myself as somewhat different entity because I hadn't been aware up to that point you know because I thought I was a good guy and there's no reason for me to think that because you're not a good guy unless you've really made a bloody effort to be a good guy you're just not it's not easy and so you're probably a moderately bad guy and that's a long ways from being an absolutely horrible guy but it's also a long ways from being a good guy and so but I had a little more respect for myself after that because I also understood that there was a monstrous element to the human psyche that that you needed to respect and that was part of you that you should regard yourself in some sense as a loaded weapon it's very useful around children to regard yourself as a loaded weapon because around children you are a loaded weapon and the terrible experiences that many children have with their parents are testament to that anyways about the same time and and I don't exactly know how these things were causally related I guess it was because I was trying to figure out who I was and how that could be fixed something like that I started to pay very careful attention to what I was saying I don't know if that happened voluntarily or involuntarily but I could feel a sort of split developing in my psyche and the split and I've actually had students tell me the same thing that has happened to them after they've listened to some of the material that that I've been describing to all of you but it's split into two let's say and one part was the let's say the old me that was talking a lot and that liked to argue and that liked ideas and there was another part that was watching that part like just with its eyes open and neutrally judging and the part that was neutrally judging was watching the part that was talking and going that isn't your idea you don't really believe that you don't really know what you're talking about that isn't true and I thought that's really interesting so now and that was happening to like 95% of what I was saying and so then I didn't really know what to do I thought okay this is strange so maybe I've fragmented and that's just not a good thing at all I mean it wasn't like I was hearing voices or anything like that I mean it wasn't like that it was it was well people have multiple parts so then I had this weird conundrum is like well which of those two things are me is it the part that's listening and saying no that's rubbish that's a lie that's you're doing that to impress people you're just trying to win the argument you know without me or was the part that was going about my normal verbal business me and I didn't know but I decided I would go with the critic and then what I'd tried to do what I learned to do I think was to stop saying things that made me weak and now that I mean I'm still trying to do that because I'm always feeling when I talk whether or not the words that I'm saying are either making me align or making me come apart and I think the alignment I really do think the alignment is I think alignment is the right way of conceptualizing it because I think if you say things that are as true as you can say them let's say then they come up they come out of the depths inside of you because we don't know where thoughts come from we don't know how far down into your sub structure the thoughts emerge we don't know what processes of physiological alignment are necessary for you to speak from the core of your being we don't understand any of that we don't even conceptualize that but I believe that you can feel that and I learned some of that from reading Carl Rogers by the way who's a great clinician because he talked about mental health in part as a coherence between the spiritual or the or the abstract and the physical that the two things were aligned and and there's a lot of idea of alignment in psychoanalytic and clinical thinking but anyways I decided that I would start practicing not saying things that would make me weak and what happened was that I had to stop saying almost everything that I was saying I would say 95% of it as a hell of a shark to wake up and I mean this was over a few months but the hell of a shark to wake up and realize that you're mostly dead would it's a shock you know and you might think well do you really want all of that to burn off well there's nothing left but a little ha sleight of you it's like well if that 5% is solid then maybe that's exactly what you want to have happened also I told you that story is an elaboration of this line and God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually to question worth asking just exactly what are your motives well you know maybe they're purer than mine were and it's certainly possible I don't think that I'm naturally a particularly good person I think I have to work at it very very hard and I don't necessarily think that everyone is like that but some people are worse than that and everyone's like that to some degree so it's worth thinking about just how much trouble are you trying to cause you know and the other thing you might think about is that if you're not doing something important with your life by your own definition because that's the game that we're playing you get to define the terms at least initially maybe you're prone to cause trouble just because you don't have anything better to do because at least its trouble is more interesting than boring you know that's something you learn if you read Dostoyevsky does he ask you knew that extraordinarily well and so if you're not doing something if you're not pushing yourself to the limits of your capacity then you have plenty of left over what would you say willpower energy and resources to devote to causing interesting trouble and so also I would say this is also an archetypal scenario God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually that's something to meditate on and it's not self-destructive because what it is is an attempt to it's like the diagnosis of an illness it's like if that does happen to be the case for you or to some degree maybe it's only 10% of you or something or maybe it's 90% well then coming to terms of that is excellent because then maybe you can stop doing it and what would be the downside to that you'd have to give up your resentment obviously in your hatred and all of that and that's really annoying because those emotions are very they're easy to engage in and they're and they're engaging and they have this feeling of self-righteousness with them and that goes along with them but you're not doing this in order to put yourself down you're doing this in order to separate the wheat from the chaff and to leave everything that you don't have to be behind and it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth and it grieved him at his heart and the Lord said I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth both man and beast and the creeping thing and the fowls of the air for it repentance me that I've made them what's the idea well the idea is that the cosmos that God created had become corrupt and that's a funny thing because you know this is the other thing about Genesis that always hits me is that that's also true I told you that the Mesopotamians believe that human beings were made out of the blood of King knew who was the worst monster monster that the dragon of chaos could imagine that's a pretty harsh diagnosis but but the reason the Mesopotamians believe that is because they knew as did the authors of genesis that human beings are the only creatures in the cosmos let's say the cosmos of being who are actually capable of deceit conscious deceit and malevolence and the question is to what degree does the expression of that conscious deceit and malevolence corrupt things so badly that it would be better that they didn't exist at all well you see stories there's a story associated with this in the epic of gilgamesh associated with the flood that has exactly the same underlying narrative structure in fact some people think the story of Noah was derived from it where the gods who created repented of their creation and determined that erasing it would be better than allowing it to propagate and you see the same thing in the Mesopotamian creation myth you knew mulisch because the early gods so they're representatives of the Giants of humanity I would say make so much noise and are so careless that the original creator God timeout and and her consort time app decides to wipe them from the face of the earth and so when you read something like this if you read it from an informed historical perspective it starts to have a depth that makes it transcend this sort of archaic and fairy tale like element of the story it's like I've read some very terrible things about what happened in Nazi Germany and and what happened when the Japanese invaded China and just what happened generally in the history of mankind and things can get so bad that it takes the imagination of a very bad person to conceptualize them and when they get that bad this is the only kind of language that works to describe them you know that's another thing that I've discovered working with my clinical clients is that when their lives are really not going well you know when they're close to suicide or when they're close to homicide or when there are things going on in the family that are so corrupt and terrible that they reach back generations and they're aimed at nothing but misery and destruction the only language that suffices has a religious tone because there's nothing else that's available to describe what's happening with the proper level of seriousness and it might be that you've never encountered a situation that required that level of seriousness but that doesn't mean that those situations don't exist they exist you generally do everything you can to avoid being ensconced in them but they certainly do exist and the probability that you'll encounter a situation like that or two at some point in your life is extraordinarily high you'll tangle with someone who's malevolent right to the core and maybe it'll be you that is and that'll be a big shock and then these sorts of things these sorts of poetic descriptors start to become much more real but Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord these are the generations of Noah Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations and Noah walked with God that's an interesting line because if you remember back in the story of Adam and Eve what happens to Adam once he eats the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil and wakes up the scales fall from his eyes become self-conscious develops the knowledge of good and evil is he won't walk with God when God calls him in the garden and so Noah is Adam without the fall essentially and there's something that knows right that motivates God to spare him or maybe to show him a pathway through the emergent chaos something like that and that's worth thinking about a lot because there will be situations in your life where what you face is the emergent chaos and maybe that'll be some terrible catastrophe inside your family or maybe it'll be something that's occurring on a much broader social level but the chaos is coming and what you're going to want to know unless you want to be a denizen of the chaos or even a contributor to it and perhaps that is what you want because many people under those circumstances choose that what you want is to know how you build an ark and get through it that's what you if you're if you're interested in life if you're interested in proper being and you're disinclined to produce any more suffering than necessary then you want to know how to conduct yourself when the catastrophe comes so that you have a reasonable possibility of of moving through it and starting anew so when when this old story says well God's not happy he's going to wipe everything out it's like well you might want to take that seriously and then when it says but there's one person who had a mode of being that protected him from that that's also something you might want to take seriously because you might want to know what that mode of being is because you might need to use it and so these sorts of things are practical in the deepest possible sense they're real in the deepest possible sense and practical in the deepest possible sense so Noah walked with God now I'm going to switch way ahead here because you know they said at the beginning of the lecture series that the Bible is a hyperlinked text and everything refers to everything else and so there's utility in reading it in linear order but it's not a linear document it's a document that that you can move through in an infinite number of there's an infinite number of pathways that you can use to walk through it and all of the document expands upon and refers to all of the rest of the document and so I'm going to switch to the sermon on the mount which i think is probably the key document in the New Testament and I'm going to switch to it because I think it's the closest thing we have to a fully articulated description of what it would mean to walk with God so that you're in the ark when the flood comes it's the it's the most fully articulated realization of that idea that that leaps out of the metaphorical because if I say well you should conduct yourself like Noah and walk with God and build an ark obviously those are poetic and metaphorical suggestions and it's not that easy to bring them into practice right it's the distance there's a big distance between you and the archetype it isn't obvious how to manifest it in your own life and what has to happen is the archetype has to be differentiated and articulated so that it becomes sufficiently practical and personal so that you can actually implement it so I'm going to take apart some of the Sermon on the Mount it starts in Matthew five and I'm not going to talk about Matthew five I'm going to talk about the end of Matthew six and most of Matthew seven consider the lilies of the field how they grow they toil not neither do they spin and yet I say unto you that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these wherefore if God so clothes the grass of the field which today is and tomorrow is cast into the oven shall he not much more clothe you O ye of little faith therefore take no Thought saying what shall we eat or what shall we drink or wherewithal shall we be clothed those are famous lines and that's our Christ the hippie right it's like hey let it all hang out that's an old phrase do your thing and everything will come to you and these lines have been interpreted in that manner many times but that's seriously not the proper interpretation because there's a kicker with this injunction and the kicker is this for your heavenly Father knows that you have need of all these things but seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness and all these things shall be added unto you that's a lot different than the hippie thing right because there's a very very very interesting idea here it's it's certainly one of the most profound ideas that I've ever encountered and the idea is this is that if you configure your life so that what you are genuinely doing is aiming at the highest possible good then the things that you need to to survive and to thrive on a day to day basis will deliver themselves to you that's a hypothesis and it's not some simple hypothesis right because it what it basically says is if you dare to do the most difficult thing that you can conceptualize your life will work out better than it will if you do anything else well how are you going to find out if that's true well it's a Kierkegaard ian's leap of faith there's no way you're going to find out whether or not that's true unless you do it so no one no one can tell you either because just because it works for someone else I mean that's interesting and all that but it's no proof that it'll work for you you have to be all-in in this game and so the idea is seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness it's like that's actually a fairly important caution when you're talking about not having to pay attention to what you're going to eat or what you're going to wear it's like what it's essentially saying is that those problems are trivial in comparison and the probability is that if you manifest yourself properly in the world that those things will come your way is extraordinarily high and I believe I believe that that's exactly right I mean I've watched people operate in the world and I would say that there is no more effective way of operating in the world than to conceptualize the highest good that you can and then strive to attain it there's no more practical pathway to the kind of success that you could have if you actually knew what success was and so that's what this that's what this sermon is attempting to to posit it's like in in the story of Pinocchio you know what happens at the beginning of the story of Pinocchio is that Geppetto wishes on a star we talked about that a little bit and so what you pedo does is align himself with the metaphorical manifestation of the highest good he can conceptualize and say he says he makes he makes a commitment let's say he aims at the star and for him the star is the possibility that he can take his creation a puppet right whose strings are being pulled by unseen forces and have it transformed into something that's economist and real well that's a hell of an ambition you know and we're wise enough to put that in the children's movie but too foolish to understand what it means it's such an interesting juxtaposition that that we can both know that and not know it at the same time you can go to the movie you can watch it and it makes sense but that doesn't mean that you can go home and think well I know what that meant well people are complicated right we exist at different levels and all the levels don't communicate with one another but but the movie is a hypothesis and the hypothesis is there's no better pathway to self-realization and the annulment of being than to posit the highest good that you can conceive of and commit yourself to it and then you might also ask yourself and this is definitely worth asking is do you really have anything better to do and if you don't well why would you do anything else therefore take no thought for the morrow for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof I spend a long time trying to figure out without man to because it's another one of those lines that can easily be read as program offer and anti amped you know you remember the old fable of the grasshopper in the end maybe not I'm not going to tell it but that works in the grasshopper fiddles and the ant has a pretty good time in the winter and the grasshopper dies and so this is like a pro grasshopper line but it's not because it says something else it says that if you orient yourself properly and then pay attention to what you do every day that works and I actually think that that's in accordance with what we have come to understand about human perception because what happens is that the world shifts itself around your aim is you're a creature that has a name you have to have a name in order to do something you're an aiming creature you look at a point and you move towards it it's built right into you and so you have a name well let's say your aim is the highest possible aim well then so that sets up the world around you it organizes all of your perceptions it organizes what you see and you don't see it organizes your emotions and your motivations so you organize yourself around that aim and then what happens is the day manifests itself as a set of challenges and problems and if you solve them properly then you stay on the pathway towards that ape and you can concentrate on the on the ate on the day and so that way you get to have your cake and eat it too because you can you can point into the distance the far distance and you can live in the day and it seems to me that that's that makes every moment of the day super charged with meaning that that's how because if everything that you're doing every day is related to the highest possible aim that you can conceptualize well that's the very definition of the meaning that would sustain you in your life well then the issue is well back to Noah well all hell is about to break loose and chaos is coming it's like when that's happening in your life you might want to be doing something that you regard is truly worthwhile because that's what will keep you afloat when when everything is flooded and you don't want to wait until the flood comes to start doing that because if your arks half built and you don't know how to captain it the probability is very high that that you'll drown take therefore no thought for the morale but for the morale shall take thought for the things of itself sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof that's not a particularly optimistic formulation judge not that ye be not judged for with what judgment you judge you shall be judged and with what measure you mete it shall be measured to you again it's a sensible piece of it's a sensible description I wouldn't call it a piece of advice because I don't think that any of this is advice it's a description of the structure of reality that's not the same as advice and it basically says that you'll be held accountable by the rules of the game that you choose to play and that I also think is perfectly in keeping with what we understand about human psychology because you you are playing you have to play a game that other people will allow you to play and that will cooperate with you while you're playing and it will compete with you while you're playing it but you have a fair bit of flexibility in setting up the parameters of the game but you don't have any choice about whether or not you're going to be in a game you're in a game and you're going to be held accountable by the rules of the game because that's how the game works and so you might want to pick a game by whose rules you would be willing to be held accountable and why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye or how will you say to thy brother let me pull out the mote out of thine eye and behold a beam is in thine own eye well you might be wondering what a beam is and a mote is a dust speck and a beam is a very large piece of lumber and so the issue is not so much the blindness of others even though there's as much blindness among others as there is as there is for you but that issue here the advice here the description here is you should be concerned about what's interfering with your own vision first and you should leave other people the hell alone in relationship to that and so if your mode of being in the world is if you would just act better things would improve for me or if you identify the evil and the catastrophe is something that's outside that someone else needs to fix or that someone's response someone else is responsible for then then you're not going to fix that and you're going to remain blind to the things that you're doing and not doing that make things not go well and so it's just better to think all right I'm probably blind in many many ways and maybe there are some ways that I could rectify that because it's highly probable that you're blind in all sorts of ways I mean it's in fact it's virtually certain and so it's just more useful to think how is it that I'm wrong in this situation I'll tell you something that I learned to do when I was arguing with my wife which happened quite frequently because when you actually communicate with people you find out that there's many things that you don't agree on and that's because you're actually different creatures and so if you're actually going to have a truthful conversation then you're going to find out that you don't see things the same way and then you can either pretend that that's not the case and gloss over it and then end up in a 30 year silent war or you can or you can have the damn fight when you need to have it and see if you could straighten it out so now and then we'd get in a situation where we were at loggerheads we couldn't move and you know it would spiral up into hate speech let's say cuz yeah everyone laughs because they know they manifest plenty of hate speech towards those they loved so one of the things we learned to do was when we hit an impasse was to separate and to go our own ways and to go sit and think okay look we're at this unpleasant situation can't figure out how to move forward I'd always think of course it's her fault obviously it's her fault least 95 percent but maybe there was something I did that contributed like five percent to it and so I would sit and think and ask myself a question which was is there anything I did in the last six months that increased the probability that this impasse would manifest itself and I'll tell you you have no idea how fast your mind will generate an answer to a question like that because there's undoubtedly some idiotic thing that you did that you know that you remember that increase the probability that you're going to have your hands around the throat of the person that you love and then you can go tell them that and then you can have a conversation especially if they do the same thing say look you know here's how I'm an idiot in this situation now the person says well yeah here's how I'm an idiot and then you're two idiots and then maybe you can have a conversation so thou hypocrite first cast out the beam of light out of thine own eye and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote of thy brother's eye that's a hard argue with that ask and it shall be given you seek and ye shall find knock and it shall be opened unto you for every one that asketh receiveth and he that seeketh findeth and to him that knocketh it shall be opened have some pretty optimistic again but but again I think it's a description of the structure of the existential reality and and but by by which I mean when I'm in my clinical practice and I observe and this is also the case with my students is let's say people's lives aren't what they would like them to be and so then you ask why well forget about tragedy in catastrophe because that's self-evident and we're not going to discuss that although the degree to which you bring about your own tragedy is always indeterminate but I would never say that every terror thing that is visited on a person is something they deserved I think that that's a very dangerous presupposition especially because everyone gets sick and everyone dies but one of the main reasons that people don't get what they want is because they don't actually figure out what it is and the probability that you're going to get what would be good for you let's say which would even be better than what you want right because you know you might be what wrong about what you want easily but maybe you could get what would really be good for you well why don't you well because you don't try you don't think okay here's what I would like if I could have it and I don't mean I don't mean in a way that you manipulate the world to force it to deliver you goods for status or something like that that isn't what I mean I mean something like imagine that you are taking care of yourself like you were someone you actually cared for and then you thought okay I'm caring for this person I would like things to go as well for them as possible what would their life have to be like in order for that to be the case what people don't do that they don't sit down and think all right you know let's let's figure it out you've got a life that's hard obviously it's like three years from now you can have what you need you've got to be careful about it you can't have everything you can have what would be good for you but you have to figure out what it is and then you have to aim at it well my experience with people as being is if they figure out what it is that would be good for them and then they aim at it then they get it and it's strange because they don't necessarily an idea about what would be good for you and then you take ten steps towards that and you find out that your formulation was a bit off and so you have to reformulate your goal you know you're kind of going like this as you move towards the goal but a huge part of the reason that people fail is because they don't ever set up the criteria for success and so since success is a very narrow line and very unlikely the probability that you're going to stumble on it randomly is zero and so there's a proposition here in proposition is if you actually want something you can have it now the question then would be well what do you mean by actually want an answer is that you reorient your life in every possible way to make the probability that that will occur as certain as possible and that's a sacrificial idea right it's like you don't get everything obviously you obviously but maybe you can have what you need and maybe all you have to do to get it is ask but asking isn't a whim or today's wish it's like you have to be deadly serious about it you have to think okay like I'm taking stock of myself and if I was going to live properly in the world and I was going to set myself up such that being would justify itself in my estimation and I don't mean as a harsh judge exactly what is it that I would aim at well one of the things I found is that in in tests of this theory let's say you could try this this is a form of Prayer knocking sit on your bed one day and ask yourself ah what's what remarkably stupid things am i doing on a regular basis to absolutely screw up my life and if you actually asked that question but you have to want to know the answer right because that's actually what asking the question means it doesn't mean just mouthing the words it means you have to decide that you want to know you'll figure that's out so fast it'll make your hair curl you'll you it's as if you thought about this he thought you know he thought that people had two poles of consciousness and one was the individual consciousness that we each identify with in the other was something he called the self and the self is the you might think about it as the divine within that's close enough approximation and to the universal part of your consciousness it's your conscience that's another way of thinking about it whatever your conscience is but it's something that you can consult it's like the Socratic Damon Socrates said that the thing that made him different than every in Greece was that he consulted his Damon his genius he asked himself how it was that he should conduct himself in the world and then he did that whatever it was he didn't try to force a solution you know he didn't try to force a solution selfishly he asked I'm going to manifest myself in the best possible manner in the world I would like to do that what would that be well you're perfectly capable of thinking god only knows how you're perfectly capable of men speeds of imagination and and dream and fantasies god only knows how you do all of that what would happen if you consulted yourself about the best possible outcome for you you might get an answer well that's what this proposition is or what man is there of you whom if his son asks for bread we'll give him a stone or if he asks for a fish will give him a serpent if ye then being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children how much more shall your father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him well this is a question about the fundamental nature of being I suppose and one of the hypotheses in the New Testament which is different to different hypotheses in some sense than the one that structures the Old Testament is that faith makes being good it's a very interesting proposition and so the notion would be and it's an action-oriented issue as well you act out the proposition that if you act properly in the world that being will reveal itself to you as benevolent but you will not know you'll never know unless you do it so this is a call to that act out the proposition that if you act properly that being itself is benevolent no reason to assume the contrary I mean to assume the contrary would be to be as cynical and bitter as possible and it's not like we don't have reason for that it's not like I don't understand why that happens to people therefore all things whatsoever you would that men should do to you do you even so to them for this is the law and the prophets and that's a reciprocity issue right it's like well imagine what would be this is another thing I learned from Jung because as Jung reversed this because this is often read it's it's the golden rule it's often read as be nice to it be nice to other people it's like that is not what this rule means it doesn't mean that even a little bit it means something like and we'll reverse it so that will concentrate on you rather than the other person to begin with it means something like conceptualize how things could be great if they were great for you if you were taking care of yourself and then work to make that the case for everyone else you know you see that in Buddhism because Buddha reached Nirvana right that's the theory and then he was tempted with the offer to stay there and he rejected that offer and came back to the profane world because he felt that the attainment of Nirvana was insufficient unless everyone attained it simultaneously and so it's something like that but it's treat yourself properly that's a hard thing to do because you're a fallen shameful cowardly deceitful malevolent mortal creature and so it's not easy and you know it and it's not easy to treat something like that properly and and it isn't obvious that people treat themselves better than they treat other people I don't think that's obvious at all but maybe you could start with yourself and think okay I'm going to take care of myself as if I have value what would that look like and then I'm going to work to extend that courtesy to everyone else and that's well the hypothesis here is that if you take all of the moral wisdom that mankind has generated over its millennia of struggle evolved and then manifested metaphors story and then codified into law articulated law and you pick one principle that dominated all of that this would be the principle and it's interesting too because it's the law and the prophets and the law is the rules but the prophets are the process by which the rules are being updated right and so the prophets are superordinate in some sense to the law and the proposition that's set forth in this particular statement is that this maxim which is optimize your own mode of being and then work to do the same for everyone around you is not only the thing that's at the core of the law but it's at the core of the process that generates and updates the law to hell of a thing for someone to say enter ye in at the narrow gate because that's what Strait means enter ye and at the straight gate for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction well who in the world could possibly argue with that everyone in the right mind knows that there's a million ways of doing things wrong and one way if you're lucky to do things right and so the notion that it's a very very narrow pathway that you tread upon if you're doing things right that's that's wisdom that's the line between chaos and order that you're supposed to be on constantly right it's a very very thin line because if you're a little bit too far in one direction then it's too much chaos and if you're a little too far in the other direction then it's too much order and both of those aren't good it has did the balance have to be exactly right and you can feel that and I truly believe you can feel that and I think it's your deepest instinct it's your deepest instinct and I mean that I mean that biologically I don't mean that metaphorically I think that your psyche is arranged to exist in a cosmos that's composed of chaos and order I think that's why you have the hemispheric structure that you have this is deeper than metaphor and then when you feel as if you're meaningfully engaged in the world when the terror of your mortality strips away and you're engaged and it's timeless that's the deepest instinct you have telling you that you're in the right place at the right time and then what you do is practice being there practice being there and that's that that narrow spot is so difficult to find you wander around it maybe if you're lucky you can watch you can watch this as an experiment watch yourself for two weeks like you don't know who you are because you don't so watch yourself for two weeks and notice there's going to be times when things are proper their raid properly for you yeah it's not easy to notice because when they're arrayed like that you're so engaged you don't exactly notice you know but you'll see oh I'm in the right place it's like okay how did I get here what am i doing right you know how is it that this could happen more often I'd like this to happen more often how would I have to conduct myself in order for that to happen more often and then you practice that and then maybe instead of ten minutes a month or ten minutes a week it's like 15 minutes a day and then it's half an hour a day and then it's an hour a day and then it's four hours a day and maybe if you if you're extraordinarily careful then you get to a point where you're like that a good proportion of the time because Strait is the gate and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life and few there be that find it beware of false prophets which come to you in sheep's clothing but inwardly they are ravening wolves that's particularly good advice for today's political situation I can tell you you shall know them by their fruits do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit well that's what I learned from studying the history of totalitarianism in the 20th century is that a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit and that's for sure and so funny you know people who think when they're thinking about the relationship with divinity or the relationship with God they think it's a primitive and childish way of thinking what if a miracle just manifests why can't a miracle just manifest itself and I would be convinced and the funny thing is is first of all actually you wouldn't be if a miracle actually happened you would actually forget about about six months that's I mean you'd think that's not true but it's true you would actually forget about it because that's what people are like but there are negative miracles that are happening all the time which actually lend some credence to my supposition and we don't pay any attention to that if we can't learn from what happened in the 20th century then we are absolutely incapable of learning because what happened in the 20th century was as bitter a set of lessons as you could possibly imagine and its associated precisely with this a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit every tree that bringeth forth that bringeth not forth good few fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire well that's a flood motif right there it's like we're constantly the archetype of the tree that's the archetype of being it's the archetype of the self often what's the warning here that if you're mostly deadwood you're going to get you're going to burn up and you can think about that metaphysically you can you can project that into eternity and you can think about that as a form of Hell and the funny thing is is that when that's happening to you in real time it is like an eternity in hell it's a perfectly reasonable way of thinking about it but you can strip the metaphysical elements off and you can say well if you're mostly dead wood then a spark will light you on fire and that's also very much worth thinking about wherefore by their fruits shall you know them not everyone that saith unto me Lord shall enter the kingdom of heaven but he that doeth the will of my father which is in heaven that's an interesting line I think I mean one of the proper critiques of traditional Christianity maybe this is the sort of critique that Nietzsche put forth was that Christianity had degenerated in its moral mission Jung was a little bit more sympathetic and I'll tell you why in a minute but Nietzsche's idea was that Christianity had lost its way when it generated the presupposition that human nnedi was saved in some final sense by the sacrifice of Christ it meant that the work was already done and that and I'm I'm being I'm being harsh in my judgment for the purpose of rhetorical simplification but the idea was that if you just professed faith that that had already occurred then you were granted eternal salvation it's like well it's not so straightforward and I think that that's what this line actually represents it says how you enter into the kingdom of heaven and and again you can think about that under the aspect of eternity or you can think about it as a psychological statement and the answer is quite straightforward is that you do what Noah did to make him immune from the flood and that's to walk with God and that's what this sermon is about it's laying out the practical elements of that and the practical elements are aimed at the highest possible good and play that out in the world and then you may have the opportunity to inhabit the highest possible good that you're positing into existence perhaps not but you can't think of any more practical way of going about that I mean if you build a house then maybe you can live in it if you don't build a house you're not going to be able to live in it if you build a good house then you'll be able to live in a good house and if you build a perfect house then maybe you can live in a perfect house but if you just say that the house has already been built for you and that you can just say that the house is being built for you well then the probability that you're going to be able to live where you need to live is there's no probability that you're going to be able to live where you need to live many will say to me in that day that's the Judgment Day Lord have we not prophesied in thy name and in thy name of cast out devils and in thy name done many wonderful works and then I will profess unto them I never knew you depart from me you that work iniquity see that's Judgment Day you know that's an archetypal idea and partly it's archetypal because everyday is Judgment Day and the part of you that the part of you that's equivalent to the logo say the part of you that's your own ideal sits in eternal judgment on your iniquity and that's the con that's the source of guilt and shame and and and withdrawal and then resentment and then murderous 'no sand then genocide it's because you can intuit the ideal and the problem with intuiting the ideal is that an ideal is always a judge there's no difference between an ideal and the judge and so you're eternally judged by your own ideal if you have no idea well then you've got no direction and no meaning in your life and then of course the more extremely ideal the harsher the judge that's actually why young young was very curious about why the book of Revelation was tacked on to the Bible to the book of Revelation that's a very weird book and you know in in in the Gospels Christ is I would say perhaps primarily merciful there's a maybe a war in his character between truth and mercy but it's one of the two perhaps mercy and Jung's observation was the gospel Christ was too merciful and that's why the book of Revelation was tapped on tacked onto the New Testament because in the book of Revelation Christ who's the ideal who's above the pyramid right the transcendent ideal is nothing but a judge and everyone fails and of course the ultimate ideal is the ultimate judge and so that's the archetypal reality there and you can say well I don't want to be judged and so I'll dispense with the ideal but then you're Cain because Cain is exactly the person who dispenses with the ideal and so there's no escaping from it there's no escaping from eternal judgment that's the archetypal story you know people put a lot of work into these representations you know and there's thousands of them they weren't messing around these are serious pieces of work you know we don't understand them but that doesn't mean that the people who created them didn't know what they were doing these were geniuses who created these pieces of work it's not like they understood in an articulated manner what they were trying to represent but what they were representing were the the metaphor is at the core of our culture to the degree that our culture is functional and good these are the metaphors upon which it's founded and they're not for the faint of heart you know you say religion is the opiate of the masses it's like yeah then how do you explain this exactly you know because if it was opiates you're after you might just get rid of that panel especially when the other thing that's so interesting about the proposition if you look at revelations in Revelation and you look at the judgment almost everyone ends up on the right side of this panel so if you are just conjuring up some sort of pathetic wish fulfillment why in the world would you tilt the scales in that manner you think that's supposed to make people feel good I don't think so there's almost nothing about this picture that should make people feel good it should if you understand it properly it should terrify you to the depths of your soul that's what the picture is for therefore whoever heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them I will liken him unto a wise man which built his house upon a rock and the rain descended and the winds blew and the floods came and beat upon the house and it fell not for it was founded upon a rock and every one that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them not shall be likened unto a foolish man which built his house upon the sand and the rain descended and the floods came and the winds blew had beat upon that house and it oh I made a mistake and it fell for it was founded upon the sand and it came to pass this is a very interesting line I really I really you know now and then you run across lines in this particularly happens in biblical settings you run across lines that you cannot believe actually exist you cannot imagine how someone could have imagined up and conjured up the line and these two lines are like that as far as I'm concerned and it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings that people were astonished at his doctrine for he taught them as one having a authority and not as the scribes and that's something so interesting you know because that was another thing that really I didn't really appreciate about the churches that I attended to and that would be that the lessons were taught by scribes and the words were mouthed but there was no power in them there was no meaning in them it was it was as if well it was like when I was 20 years old and I was saying all these things I didn't mean you know they were words that sounded good they were like like gilded cloth I suppose that you can that you can wrap around yourself but there's no substance to them and there's a big difference between listening to something that has substance and listening to something that is spoken because it sounds like it should sound good and this line says that whoever spoke the lines that we just described was someone who sounded like he knew what he was talking about and not someone who was just repeating something for the sake of sounding good and it certainly seems to me that the lines that we just reviewed have the awesome impact of authority back to Noah but Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord these are the generations of Noah Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations and Noah walked with God and Noah begat three sons Shem ham and Japheth the earth was also corrupt before God and the earth was full of violence filled with violence any of you see the new NRA ad you might want to look that up I would say that's the most shocking manifestation of political polarization in the United States that I've yet seen most of it I've seen on the left/right the real what shocked me mostly has been on the left but the new NRA ad that's a whole new thing so it's this attractive woman and doing a voiceover she kind of looks like Demi Moore well she's kind of tough looking I guess Demi Moore could look tough now and then and she has contempt on her face and that's a dangerous thing and in the background there's nothing but images of anteye far is and Berkeley riots and fire and protest and she's describing that as a conspiracy essentially a conspiracy that involves the intellectual elite including Hollywood which is named by name the accusation is is that there's a cabal of corrupt intellectuals let's say who are bringing the country to its knees and that it's time to get your goddamn guns and so look up that and see what you think because there's lots of people who would be perfectly happy if that was the direction in which you were headed and one of the things that I'm hoping is that we might be able to talk our way through it but we're in a situation where every act of idiot individual idiocy will push us one iota closer to the brink and that'll make the 15 percent of the population or 30 percent of the population who would love to see everything degenerate into chaos perfectly happy because that's their aim the earth also was corrupt before God and the earth was filled with violence and God looked upon the earth and behold it was corrupt for all flesh is corrupted his way upon the earth and Noah said and God said unto Noah the end of all flesh has come before me for the earth is filled with violence through them and behold I will destroy them with the earth make the an ark of gopher wood rooms shalt thou make in the Ark from that shalt pitch it within and without with pitch and this is the fashion which thou shalt make of it the length of the ark shall be 300 cubits the breadth of it 50 cubits in the height of it 30 cubits a window shalt thou make to the ark and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof with lower second and third stories shalt thou make it and behold I even I do bring a flood of waters upon the earth to destroy all flesh wherein is the breath of life from under heaven and everything that is in the earth shall die but with thee I will establish my covenant and thou shalt come into the are thou and thy sons and thy wife and thy sons wives with thee that's a fairly optimistic twist on the story because not only is it Noah but he gets to save his whole family and down a couple of generations and so that's a good thing to think about it's like as things know I had this client and she had a very hard upbringing I would say not a lot of encouragement to say the least let's say a fair bit of discouraged meant and she had a son and what was really interesting about her in relationship to her son is that all the things that she could have learned to do to him given her extensive experience with being made as miserable as possible by someone who was hell-bent on bringing her to her knees she refused to do to her son right she learned the opposite lesson from all her misery and torment which was not to move that forward down the generations and so the idea here is that if you walk properly a name properly and act properly if you walk with God in this manner that we've been discussing is that perhaps that isn't only good for you perhaps it's also the thing that will save your family and then by implication perhaps saves Society because that's exactly what happens with Noah right first it's him and then it's his family but everything else goes and so by saving himself by acting properly and by saving his family he actually saves the world it's interesting you know it's like the most profound people that I've read who've meditated deeply on the problem say of totalitarian catastrophe and I would put Alexander Solzhenitsyn at the top of that list you know the his entire corpus three volumes 700 pages long each in tiny type is a long scream about the absolute necessity of individual the absolute necessity of individual honesty and ethical behavior as the only bulwark against totalitarian catastrophe and that and I've read many writers who've attempted to diagnose the problems of the 20th century and I think elgyn Edson he came to the same conclusions that Viktor Frankl came to as a consequence of his experiences in the Nazi concentration camps and Frankel I am also an admirer of Franco but Solzhenitsyn takes it to an entire different level of profundity and makes an extraordinarily strong case that not only do societies deteriorate because the people within the societies become individually corrupt but that the only way to stave that off is for the individuals within that society to reject that corruption in the in the confines of their own personal lives and he tells endless stories of people that he met in the gulag and in the work camps in the death camps in the Soviet Union of people and this is what he learned of people who were so incredibly tough that even under conditions the most possible extreme conditions there wasn't a chance that they were going to step off that straight and narrow line there was nothing the authorities could do to move them and just watching that was enough to transform Solzhenitsyn because of course one of the things he wondered was after spending a good amount of time in the work camps was well just exactly how did I get here and it wasn't well it was Hitler's fault and it was Stalin's fault although it was definitely the fault of both of them for Solzhenitsyn it was well it was also his fault because he was playing the same game he just wasn't as good at it and of every living thing of all flesh two of every sort shall thou bring into the ark to keep them alive with thee they shall be male and female and so there's another message in this story which is that it isn't only Noah and his family and human society that's dependent on Noah's appropriate actions in the world it's the entire living planet and in an era of excessive and extreme and genuinely disingenuous environmental catastrophe Singh that's something to consider very seriously think perhaps there's nothing better that you can do for everything all things considered including those things that are outside the confines of human society than to get your act together and align yourself properly along all of the dimensions of your being from from from the tiniest microcosm to the to the ultimate macrocosm and that's the way that all of being is redeemed that's what the story suggests and we read it you know a cynical modern people we read it as if it was written by primitive people who thought that it was really the case that someone could build a boat and put two of every kind into it and thereby saved the world it's embarrassing to see things interpreted in a manner that shallow especially by people who don't have ignorant as a justification you know these stories have to appeal to everyone right and there's lots of people in the world who aren't very bright and so they tend to take things concretely like a child would take things concretely if you read them a story and this story can be taken concretely but it has to be because these stories have to be for everyone but if you're sophisticated that doesn't mean that you should dismiss it as if it's written for a child it's maybe you have the obligation to look a bit deeper and think for a moment that it wouldn't been conserved for these many thousands of years if there wasn't something more to it than a casual intellectual dismissal would indicate and take thou on to the of all food that is eaten and thou shalt gather it to thee and shall be food for the end for them thus did Noah according to all that God commanded him so did he and the Lord said unto Noah come thou and all thy house into the ark for the I have seen righteous before me in this generation of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens the male and his female and a beasts that are clean but not clean by two the male and his female of follows also of the air by sevens the male and the female to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth for yet seven days I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights and every living substance that I've made will I destroy from off the face of the earth and Noah did according unto all depth lord commanded him and though it was 600 years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth and Noah went in and his sons and his wife and his sons wives with him into the ark because of the waters of the flood of clean beasts and the beasts that are not clean enough follows and of everything that creepeth upon the earth they went in 2 and 2 unto Noah into the ark the male and the female as God had commanded Noah and it came to pass after seven days that the waters of the flood were upon the earth in the six hundredth year of Noah's life in the second month the seventeenth day of the month the same day were all the Fountains of the great deep broken up and the windows of heaven were opened and the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights and the self-same day entered Noah and Shem and ham and Japheth sons of Noah and Noah's wife and 3 wives of his sons with them into the ark today and every beast after his kind and all of the cattle after their kind and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind and every fowl after his kind every bird of every sort and they went into Noah unto Noah into the ark two and two of all flesh wherein is the breath of life that makes know where they ultimate Shepherd right Shepherd of all things tender of the garden and Shepherd of all things that's a hell of a roll and maybe that's the one that keeps you afloat during the flood and they that went in went in male and female of all flesh as God had commanded him and the Lord showed him in and the flood was forty days upon the earth and the waters increased and bear up the ark and it was left up above the earth and the waters prevailed and were increased greatly upon the earth 15 cubits upward did the waters prevail and the mountains were covered and all flesh died that moved upon the earth both of fallen of cattle and the beasts and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth and every man and all in whose nostrils was the breath of life of all that was in the dry land died and every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the earth both man and cattle and the creeping things in the fall of the heaven and they were destroyed from the earth and Noah only remained alive and they that were with him in the ark and the waters prevailed upon the earth one hundred and fifty days and God remembered Noah every living thing and all the cattle that was with him in the ark and God made a wind to pass over the earth and the waters receded the Fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped in the rain from heaven was restrained and the waters returned from off the earth continually and after the end of a hundred and fifty days the waters were abated and the ark rested in the seventh month on the seventeenth day of the month upon the mountains of Ararat and the waters decreased continually until the tenth month in the tenth month on the first day of the month were the tops of the mountains seen and it came to pass at the end of 40 days that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made and he sent forth a raven which went to and fro until the waters were dried up from off the earth and he also sent forth a dove from him to see if the water's were abated from off the face of the ground but the devil found no rest for the sole of her foot and she returned unto him in the ark for the waters were on the face of the whole earth then he put forth his hand and took her and pulled her in unto him into the ark and he stayed yet another seven days and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark and the Dove came in to him in the evening and lo in her mouth was an olive leaf plucked off so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth and he stayed there yet another seven days and sent forth the Dove which returned not again unto him anymore and it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year in the first month the first day of the month the waters were dried up from off the earth and Noah removed the covering of the ark had looked up and behold the face of the ground was dry and in the second month on the seventh and twentieth day of the month was the earth dried and God spake unto Noah saying go forth of the ark thou and thy wife and thy sons and thy sons wives with thee bring forth with the every living thing that is with thee of all flesh both of fowl and of cattle and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth that they may breed abundantly in the earth and be fruitful and multiply upon the earth and Noah went forth and his sons and his wife and his sons wives with them beast creeping thing every fowl and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth after their kinds went forth out of the ark and Noah builded an altar unto the Lord and took of every clean beast and of every clean fowl and offered burnt offerings on the altar immediate returns the sacrificial motif and the Lord smelled a sweet savour and that's Noah's proper sacrifice and the Lord said into his heart I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth neither will I again smite any more every living thing as I have done while the earth remaineth seedtime and harvest and cold and heat and summer and winter and day and night shall not cease and God blessed Noah and his sons and said unto them be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth and upon every fowl of the air upon all that moveth upon the earth upon all the fishes of the sea into your hand are they delivered you know I've heard commentators David Suzuki for example who claimed that the substructure of Western culture in lines such as this deliver the earth over to human beings and and justify our ravaging of the of being but I don't think that that's a very careful reading and it seems to me that given such matters given the importance of such matters that a very close reading is actually necessary you know in the story of Adam and Eve when Adam and Eve are thrown out of the garden God tells Eve that she's going to be subordinated to her husband he doesn't say that that's what should happened he says that's what's going to happen and the same thing as far as I'm concerned is contained in lines like this isn't necessarily that this is something that should happen it's something that did to happen it's quite remarkable you know to think about how long ago these lines were penned it wasn't obvious until perhaps the 1960s that we had dominated the earth so completely that it's very future existence within our hands and that's a prophetic element of this tale and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth and upon every fowl of the air and upon all that moveth upon the earth and upon all the fishes of the sea into your hand are they delivered like that's exactly right every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you even as the green herb I've given you all things have I given you all things but flesh with the life thereof which is the blood thereof shall you not eat and surely your blood of your lives will I require at the hand of every beast will I require it at the hand of man at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man this is a hard section to interpret but what it means is something like this God describes the dominion over the planet that vilified humanity will have and note the power that goes along with that and then puts a limitation on it and the limitation is maintain the sanctity of life despite your power and although it's not easy to extract from the manner in which this is being translated what God is telling Noah is that if you kill yourself if you kill someone else and if any animal kills a human being that there will be a price to pay for that so there's a an opportunity which is that the descendants of Noah can dominate the earth but there's a moral limitation placed on that which is nonetheless life itself is to be regarded as sanctified and sacred whoever shared if man's blood by man shall his blood be shed for in the image of God made he mad and you be you fruitful and multiply bring forth abundantly in the earth and multiply therein and God spake unto Noah and to his sons with him saying and I behold I establish my covenant with you and with your seed after you and with every living creature that is with you of the fowl and the cattle and of every beast of Earth that is with you for all that go out of the ark to every beast of the earth and I will establish my covenant with you neither shall all flesh be cut off anymore by the waters of a flood neither shall there be anymore a flood to destroy the earth and God said this is the token of the Covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you for perpetual generations I do set my bow in the cloud and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth and shall come to pass when I bring a cloud over the earth that the bow shall be seen in the cloud and I will remember my covenant which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh there's a negotiated agreement there of sorts and the negotiated agreement is as far as I can tell to the degree that humanity agrees to act in the manner of Noah then the threat of catastrophic destruction will remain at bay and the bow shall be in the cloud and I will look upon it that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth and God said unto Noah this is the token of the Covenant which I've established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth this is the token of the Covenant which I've established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth so that's a good place to stop and there's no lecture next week by the way because the theater was booked so there'll be a one-week break and then when we get back we'll finish the story of Noah there's not much left of it we'll talk about the Tower of Babel which is a very short story but a very very interesting one and then we'll move on to the story of Abraham and so thank you very much for coming and we'll see you in two weeks now is the person who has the notification for the meetup after this here and do they have the notification okay because if you give that to me this time I'll remember to read it before everyone leaves so do you want to start okay so see it let's see if the mic is working because lots of people will listen to this question and so okay okay so you said on a recent livestream that you were to you didn't have enough energy to answer this question but you said it was intriguing so I was wondering if you had the energy to answer how someone might help someone that has borderline personality disorder by example by example no no no I don't I don't mean that precisely I mean that the let's not take borderline personality disorder precisely as the example okay I understand the question the question to some degree is how do you help someone that's lost and answer that is if they aren't willing to not be lost you cannot help them and I would also say that as a clinician you see I mean it's an it's a statement that's informed I would say by mythological knowledge but also by straight clinical wisdom not mine particularly I mean one of the things that Carl Rogers pointed out was that there were necessary preconditions for entering into a therapeutic relationship and that would be really any relationship where the mutual flourishing of the two people involved was the Paramount goal and one of the preconditions was that both people had to want that to happen and Rogers believed he didn't know how to get the horse to drink when she had brought it to the water and I thought about that a lot because when people are really lost sometimes they're so lost that that they can't be found and I think the only thing that you can do in a situation like that is get your life together and she and manifest the reality of an alternative mode of being that's what you've got and so that's the only way I know of to solve an intractable problem and I would say the reason that I went down that direction with regards to borderline personality disorders because it's one of the most serious of the personality sort is very difficult to treat and so I'll generalize from that to situations that are very difficult to deal with and you know there's a statement to and this has nothing to do with borderline personality disorder per se there's a statement in the New Testament that's really vicious in fact there's a number of them but this is a particularly vicious one and that is don't cast pearls before swine and what that means is if you're trying to help and it doesn't work then stop helping it's not helping right it may be just wasting your time it might be making things worse no if you're if you're offering something and it's not taken then perhaps you should be offering it somewhere else and sometimes if you offer hand and the person won't take it you have to stop offering the hand and then what you do is you go off and you have your life and sometimes that means in people's lives for example that they have to leave their family members behind there's a scene in the New Testament this is another very harsh scene where Christ is walking down the road with his disciples I hope I've got this story right but I've got it essentially right and his mother calls to him and says I believe that he's supposed to come back to the home because his uncle has died and that there's going to be a funeral and he turns to his mother and says something like let the dead bury their dead I'm about my father's business it's something like that and you read that you think huh that should have been edited out no but it shouldn't have been added it out because it's exactly right because sometimes the thing you do is walk away because there's no other solution and if you are trapped in pathologic relationships and you see no way out of them if you if someone who is thinking has their hands around your neck and is pulling you down you're not obligated to drown with them now there's a rule too if you're a lifeguard you know some of you have had lifeguard training how do you approach someone who's drowning and panicking in the water feed out right like this it's like I'll save you but that doesn't mean you get to drown me while I'm doing it and if it's you drown or both of us drown it's you drown and that's wisdom that's not cruelty right so yeah a couple of questions about dialog and engaging in dialogue with people so the first issue that I face is I have a very high need for intellectual stimulation and I can't get that with most people it's something like you can you can have a dialogue for a time but then titrate openness yeah and then I would then they started run out of ideas they can keep up and it sort of falls apart okay this is the problem that intellectuals have quite frequently is that they sort of once they start reading difficult and rewarding stuff yeah they stopped wanting to talk to regular people and I think that contributes to the disconnect that you see between intellectuals and working-class people and stuff like that and the other question I had was about okay wait I don't know if that's a question I mean I believe there's a question in there but I digress tchen is how did we dress that how should I dress it and is that something that can be dressed well part of part of the answer to that is that's what the universities were for I mean you know not everybody is equipped to or interested in engaging in high-level discussion of abstract and creative ideas you know you hear this idea that everyone's creative that's a lie it's as straightforward as that drew creativity is very very rare and so and if you happen to be a creative person or if you happen to be someone who's profoundly interested in ideas you are in a pronounced minority just as you are if you happen to be extremely extroverted or extremely agreeable or extremely conscientious these are minority issues and what you do is you find like-minded people who are capable of engaging that you know a heavy weight with heavy weight weight lifters compete with heavy weight weight lifters for a reason and everyone thinks that's fine the same thing applies to intellectual and creative endeavors so what you do is you try to find a community where that's that's the nature of the community and you likely have to find a relationship like that as well you know so I don't think so I think what contributes to the siloing is the arrogance that goes along with it because if you're you can be interested in ideas and you can be creative well that's the arrogance of the intellect right that's the thing the Catholic Church had warned about for centuries is the arrogance of the intellect so because if you're if you're wise as well as smart and there is no relationship between being smart and being wise they are not the same thing there's no quick pathway from smart to wise and many of the people who I've known who were very wise were what some of them were intellectually impaired and were still wise you know so it's the arrogance that brings up the block and I see this for example happening in the United States in particular because the last time I went down there for example I was I had friends down there and and some of those friends are very very smart people and some of them were talking about the Trump voters and they were talking about the Trump voters with contempt and I thought you better watch that because that's 50% of the damn population and it might be convenient to think that they're stupid and beneath you but it's not conducive to a civil state and there's no evidence that it's true because there isn't a straight line between intelligent and wise and so I think that if you're if your character is developed and you're intelligent you can have your siloed creative community but you develop enough wisdom so that you can see all the things that people can do that are of high ethical utility that are outside the intellectual domain you know and I think that's why in the New Testament I think that's why Christ is a carpenter right because well first of all carpenter is one of those jobs that when you're dishonest it manifests itself immediately because what you build falls down and so if you're an honest carpenter you build a good house so that there's a nice metaphor there but it's also it's also a warning in some sense against the the equation of intellectual brilliance with moral superiority and so if the intellects would drop their moral superiority and fat chance there is of that then that divide between the working class say and the elite would would resolve and there's every reason to have respect for decent working class people I mean it's on their labour as the left wingers at least hypothetically agree that the entire edifice of the culture is is resting so you can have your cake and eat it too but you have to not assume that your niche makes you superior and it's very difficult for smart people especially smart there's a scene in leeches it seems thus spake Zarathustra wears arethusa the Prophet comes down from the mountain and he comes into a public square and there's this crowd around this little midget who's only about this high who have a gigantic ear and everyone is marveling at him well that's what the modern intellect is like it's a midget with a giant well mouth generally not an ear and the the the being is underdeveloped but the intellect is hyper activated and and it makes the person extraordinarily unbalanced and his part because they they can't compete outside the intellectual realm and that makes them very bitter because they tend to think well God I'm so smart everything should just come to me it's like sorry that's not how the world works and and it also that that and that that that attitude is immediately evident to people that they're talking to when they talk in the manner that they talk if they are arrogant intellectuals of that sort you see that in the Simpsons did a good job of that with comic book guy right I mean he completely useless in every possible dimension with an IQ of about 160 and it's very annoying to people who have an IQ of 160 that they can also be completely useless but it happens a lot so yeah hi dr. Peterson long time no see how are you doing thanks so I was up first going to ask about your thoughts on a very popular TV show Rick and Marty you know someone just recommended that to me and they said they thought I would find it funny and that makes me nervous because I like the Simpsons and I like the Trailer Park Boys for actually like the trailer I really liked the Trailer Park Boys and so someone said I know it's so sad you know but they said that I would like Rick and Morty so I'm kind of afraid to even watch it it does have a nihilistic theme to it no I would say so that which is quite telling of the young population which they flee they fall in love with it everyone's talking about it so uh-huh okay well I'll definitely watch it because I've been looking for something to watch when I'm brain dead at night so but I decide to tell them my question from a different angle if I may and it's about the case that governments let's say such as Russia and Iran they have any more extreme cases like Isis they do not want to conform to the nihilistic aspects of the West as a result they've taken an anti-western approach as someone with a Middle Eastern background I've been trying to figure out where the origins of this hostility more precisely comes from and why things are the way they are I recently found out that certain key Iranian philosophers and political activists were partially intuitively responsible for the 1979 Iranian Revolution were highly influenced by the anti Western high daguerreian philosophy and this is partially why they believed that an Islamic state would and it'd be messy and necessary counter position to the ninth nihilistic Western thought you I know that you also come there with Alexander dooking putting those liza yes except Dugan doesn't really seem to have a coherent answer he says that an answer like that is necessary and that hypothetically it's something that Russia might be able to offer but the details seem to me somewhat obscure I mean the Russians maybe the Russians are doing what Solzhenitsyn suggested and returning to Orthodox Christianity although Russia is corrupt enough so that it's very difficult to tell from the outside if that's mere collusion between the corrupt church in a corrupt state or if there's something genuine going on there now you know the I would say there's a question under your question which is tyranny or nihilism well that's a good question man that's a good question well lots of people would pick tyranny over nihilism and so if that's the only choice that people are offered then and I also think that tyranny is stronger than nihilism because what are you going to do organize nihilists hardly well look at look at what happened to what was that thing in Central Park you know against the 1% Jesus I mean what a dismal affair that was we'd like things to be different how well we don't know like so you know you can just run over that if you're tyrannical and organized you can just run over that like there's nothing there at all and that I think there is a danger and I do think that we're enticing the Islamofascists let's say by our nihilistic weakness and I think more than that I think that we're doing something more than that because one of the things that I've been curious about and I'm going way out on a limb here is I've been really interested in the alliance between the neo-marxist nihilistic are the neo-marxist postmodernists especially the feminists and the Islamofascists I just don't get that it's like there's something very very interesting going on there and I think part of it is that when you when you drift too far into the nihilistic sub structure there's a huge call for tyrannical order that manifests itself unconsciously and so that's the dynamic that I see playing out in that peculiar relationship between the modern neo-marxist feminists and Islamofascists I don't I don't know that's a very that's very interesting that that's a very interesting idea that you brought to mind I had no idea that there was a relationship between Heidegger and what happened in Iran in the 1970s if you could send me a citation about that or something to read I'd be very interested in doing that so okay yep yep thank you that's that's that's the closest thing I think I'll experienced it out to arnold schwarzenegger actually delivering that line yeah the purrito distribution yeah yeah yeah not Ross but yeah do you have to work oh it's a nasty it's a nasty law yeah it was also known as prices law yeah yeah yeah yeah great yeah yeah yeah hopefully there's fewer of them than that okay two to two things the first is it isn't obvious what the population would be that you would compare this population to right because you could say well the boundary is the four hundred people in this room but it isn't necessarily the case the four hundred people in this room might be the square root of the broader population we're interested in this sort of thing but with the purrito distribution what you also see is that it's it's self similar and so let's say there's four hundred people doing something twenty of them are doing half the work but if you take twenty four of them are doing half the work of the twenty and one of the four is doing half the work of the four and so it's so why am I telling you that it's it isn't it well first of all it isn't that there isn't useful work to be done at multiple slices of the purrito distribution but the other thing is it's also the case that there's not only one purrito distribution right because you might say well if it's just the square root of the number of people in a domain that are doing half the work then you know what do you do with the rest of the people and the answer that might be well they're in a prio different preeto distribution as well where they're doing something productive so well I think it's a good question like we don't exactly end so so the basic rule is the look the basic rule is for example if you take a hundred scientists in a given domain ten of them will have published half the papers and this works with everything it works with with every creative domain the rule applies so now the question is why and I think the choir the answer to that seems to be and I've watched people who become spectacular ly successful it what happens is that zero is a really bad place to be right it's really hard to get out of zero and that's often why people are trapped in poverty because if you have nothing getting to something is virtually impossible once you have something getting to a little more of something is actually quite a bit easier and so what seems to happen this is also called the Mathieu principle right it's the same principle so that's a New Testament citation let's say the Mathieu principle is to those who have everything more will be given from those who have nothing everything will be taken that's another one of those lines in the New Testament that you'd think that a good editor would have just got rid of so but but but I think what it is is that every time you make a step forward the probability that you'll be able to take the next step forward increases and it seems to increase in a nonlinear way so the the world that the Mathieu principle describes is nonlinear you know so you might say well what's your trajectory if you're moving upward well it's not this it's this what's your trajectory if you're moving downward it's not this it's this right you fall you fall you plummet you rise you rise you transcend it's something like that and you might say well that's a hell of a world but whatever it has to be run by some principle and that's the principle that it appears to be run by yes no no no it doesn't mean that at all what it means is that every truth claim you make including those that are implicit in your actions carries with it an ethic that justifies or doesn't justify the action so for example let's say I have a tool and I say it's an axe and I go to the forest and I cut down I try to cut down a tree with it and it doesn't work it's not an axe it's something else and so what the what there's a good book on pragmatism called the metaphysical Club a history of American ideas it's what I would really recommend and what the pragmatists I can't give you a full answer because this is such a complicated issue but what the pragmatists were wrestling with back in the late 1800s the late 1800s this was William James and his crew in in Boston including a philosopher named CS purse who was perhaps America's greatest philosopher they were wrestling with the same issue that the postmodernist would wrestle with 100 years later which is things are indefinitely complex and we're not very bright so how is it that we can make claims to truth about anything and what they were what their their hypothesis essentially was is that with every action and with every truth claim you simultaneously demarcate a territory within which that claim is valid and you you determine whether the claim is valid by noting whether your prediction about the outcome of your action or your or your belief is commencer is is in keeping with if the outcome is in keeping with the prediction then what you've said or done is true or good enough and that's as good as you get and so that's the pragmatic perspective and then when when when the pragmatist encountered charles dark charles darwin's works works they immediately recognized that darwin had generated a pragmatic solution to the problem of the impossibility of being the impossibility of being is this there's way more cosmos than there is you you are going to die you cannot generate a sufficient solution to the problem of your being no one can nothing can it's like the environment is a snake that moves unpredictably across time and you're trying to stay on its back well as how how does the Darwinian process deal with that it produces infinite variance roughly speaking almost all of which die and that's how it solves the problem across time and the things that exist is the things that stay alive are true enough and that's the best you get that's the argument I was trying to have with Sam Harris because Harris doesn't take his evolutionary cycle is a Volusia nary theory seriously enough but we get to kept getting bogged down anyways that's that's the best answer oh I'd like to agree with that but it's not true yeah yep yep yep you really do like to ask hard questions so you I think it depends see this is also why like the pH alien take let's say on on pragmatism because I think that pragmatism as a philosophy has the limitation that you just described but only if you think about the games as limited if you have to play the game in an iterative way then that issue resolves itself and the game theorists have done a good job of mapping that out it's like you could say let's say pragmatically speaking there's no reason I shouldn't deceive you once if I can get what I want it's yeah yeah except that I'm probably not only going to interact with you once I'm going to interact with you a lot and even if it isn't you that I interact with it's going to be a bunch of beings that are so much like you that it might as well be you might as well be you it's going to be me if nothing else and so the pragmatic game stretched across time would include the necessity of iterability in relationship to the validations of the truth claims that's that's how it looks to me I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna stop you if we have say that again yes yes thank you yes but that's not all I am so this is on behalf of somebody dr. Peterson having listened to your expositions on the mythological evolution and amalgamation of religion and keeping in mind your working definitions of belief and truth and despite the obvious reasons for somebody of your background to identify most with Christianity my understanding is that you believe Christianity to be the most complete and articulated form of many of the metaphysical ideas that preceded it and led up to that keeping that in mind would it also be accurate to therefore say that you're not only a believer in Christianity but also if to a lesser degree also believer in in Mourdock in the ancient Egyptian gods and the subsequent gods that you've spoken up here that led up and contribute it to the form of Christianity that you're discussing and that you identify with okay I'm going to take that one apart a little bit I'm bounded in my judgment with regards to Christianity by my ignorance I'm no student of Hinduism so I can't make the claim forthrightly that there's something intrinsically superior to the judeo-christian tradition because I don't know enough to make that claim the claim I can make is that there's something that's dreadfully right about this core elements of the judeo-christian tradition and I've seen analogues to that like one of the things I'd like to do for example is to do a short series on the Delta H Inc because that is one remarkable document once you know especially you might want to read it you can go online and read it's very short out etching ta o teh CH ing and it's the fundamental text of Taoism and once you know that the world of being is made of chaos and order and you know that that's represented by the yin and the yang all of a sudden you can understand the DAO de Jing and it's just it's brilliantly simple and straightforward in it's exposition but it also seems to me to be entirely commensurate with the line of of let's call it logic it's more like a the the mode of description of being that's encapsulated in these stories now with regards to being a believer people ask me all the time two things say do you believe in God and are you a Christian and they answered without both of those is actually there's two answers one is what the hell makes you think it's any of your business that's the first answer and the second is why do you think that you mean the same thing with those questions that I would mean with my answer so you know what because it's such a funny thing because I spent like three and this is no accusation with regards to your questions in the least you know I think it's more about trying to detract the development of these ideas and you know the residual truth and so yeah psychological significance of all these other traditions I think well you know I did I've been there floored by other mythological structures like when I first understood or thought I understood the meaning of the Mesopotamian creation method just I've never recovered from that I would say and the same thing is true of the investigations I did into the Egyptian myths of Horus and Isis and Osiris and Seth it's just a and they're they're so relevant I mean they're so unbelievably relevant and how do how do see this is a problem that none of us really know how to solve it's like they're our sources of wisdom all over the world let's say and they need to be made commensurate with one another which isn't to say that they need to be turned into a fast-food mall you know that's that's like multiculturalism right it's like all the food of the world served in the most terrible possible manner all in one place and something like that and you don't want to do that with comparative religion it's just water everything down and say well it's all nice it's like no it is not nice yeah or that it's all the same because it's not all the same so the the job of communicating between those domains of wisdom is really continuing right it's been a problem ever since the beginning of civilization but it's continuing and I would say the psychoanalyst Jung in particular was took to huge huge steps in in the direction of doing that an extraordinarily positive way and not a simple minded way at all and not just hand waving that oh well it's everyone has one and all shall have prizes not that so yeah last question I choose it kind of in the same vein but it's in regards to another kind of mythology so yeah in terms of I guess Carl Jung's own with us sorry I'm extremely tall but a lot of the I achieved I found some kind of archetypes like for example in my own life but also I've noticed in European life so for example in regards to Odin and Norse mythology yeah with Corleone si I've only been able to actually skim it because I've been like trying to find something like because I felt like there's always this kind of psyche that was almost underneath I guess Western civilization and we see it really like embodied in this specific figure this deity the wanderer the knowledge gatherer the seeker but he's also a war goddess these all these different aspects that are an accumulation of what seems to be something that's distinctly Western mm-hm and I feel this is like almost like this symbol in a way of course it's not always followed there seems to be something maybe there seems to be something I do think that the idea of the individual has been articulated most fully in the West I don't think that's really a I don't think that's a contentious claim actually that doesn't mean that the latent structures from which that idea might emerge weren't also many other places simultaneously and the other thing from let's say from a biological perspective is that we're only talking about differences of a few hundred years in terms of the manifestation of these ideas right from from an evolutionary perspective that's it's instantaneous it's like well a new idea has to arise somewhere so is going to be somewhere first and but it's spreading I mean Christianity for example spread so rapidly that it's absolutely beyond belief and it is actually spreading more rapidly in China now than it did in ancient Rome so well in regards to that it's also been seen like almost in the wake of a dying Christianity I've noted that like there's been a tendency to go towards I guess paganism right yes I understand the like some people laugh at all yes we have Wicca which was mainly a manifestation of Aleister Crowley in his works which were then ended off to whoever actually made the actual ideology and then next thing you know we're finding something almost more stable in I guess Norse mythology and it seems like it's acting almost as a pendulum school swing from something that well people are good like the thing is is when one when one mythological structure collapses it's going to collapse into another mythological structure or another set of mythological structures and and because you can't get out of the mythological structures there's no possible way of doing that what and so I wouldn't say necessarily that the fact that other belief systems emerge in the aftermath of the collapse of the overarching belief system I don't think that that's necessarily a bad idea I think that it has its attendant dangers and so I should stop because I'm starting to get tired and I'm not going to be able to formulate any clearer answers than that and it's also 10 o'clock so we also do have to stop oh yes there is an unofficial Meetup and discussion group at Hemingway's restaurant second floor 142 Cumberland Street just say you're with the Jordan Peterson discussion group yes everyone is invited if you say you're with the Jordan Peterson discussion group please don't misbehave too badly so I've been thinking this week about doing this one from once a month on a continuing basis so so I think if I do that I think it'll be here although it's harder to rent this theater during the academic year but if it isn't here it'll be somewhere else and because I'd like to continue doing this I'm learning a lot from doing it and and once a month would really be good because then I could really do the background work and and I could probably do that for a couple of years because obviously this is going very quickly but that's okay you know I mean it shouldn't go any faster than it can go and that's how it that's how it seems to me anyways so this has been this has been a very steep learning curve for me with regards to these stories because I didn't understand them very well and I got better at using the resources on line to help me do my background investigation I have a lot of books and some of you may have noticed that online I posted a conversation I had with Jonathan Powell and his and his brother Matthew I hope it's Matthew ivory names escape me so badly but I believe that's right he just finished a book on them on the Bible and so I've been doing a lot of thinking and talking about these stories trying to understand what they're about and and then there's all these commentaries there's a great site I think it's called Bible hub that has every single verse of the Bible is listed there and then with each verse there are like they've aggregated ten commentaries from about ten commentaries from over the last four hundred years and so there's like a dense page on every line and that's one of the things that's really interesting about this book too is that it's it's aggregated so much commentary that it's that it's it's much bigger than looks the book is much bigger than it looks and so it's been very interesting to become familiar with those two and the fact that this site is set up with all the commentaries split up by verses means you can rapidly compare the commentaries and get a sense of you know how people have interpreted this over while at least several hundred years but of course much longer than that because the people who wrote the commentaries were of course reading things that were older than that so that's been very very interesting so last week we talked about a couple of things we talked about how you might understand the idea of the divine encounter and then we also paralleled that with the idea that God disappears in the Old Testament he he boughs out as the stories progress and that seems to be a an emergent property of the sequencing of the stories right because all the books were written by independent people different people and then they were aggregated by other people and so the narrative continuity is some kind of emergent property that's it's a consequence of this interaction between people readers and writers over centuries and it's it's strange that given that there are also multiple coherent narratives that United you know it's really it's really not that easy to understand that but it does at least seem to be the case and so and the third thing we talked about was that as God bows out so to speak the the the individual personality seems of the characters that are involved the human characters that are involved seems to become more and more developed and it isn't exactly clear what that I mean what it means is that God steps away and man steps forward that's what it means but why it's arranged like that or they or they say ultimate significance of that is by no means clear and so so Abraham who we're going to concentrate on today is quite a well-developed character and I would say there are two there multiple endings and beginnings in the biblical stories the most important ending I suppose is the ending of the the garden of paradise and and the disenchantment of the world and the sending forth of Adam and Eve into history right into the future into into a mode of being that has a future as part of it and that has history as part of it and that has the necessity of sacrifice and toil as part of it that's obviously crucial and then that's that is replayed with the story of Noah because everything is destroyed and then the world is created anew and then sacrifices have to be made in order for the world to begin and then you see the same thing happen again after the Noah story in the Tower of Babel because history as we really understand history seems to start with Abraham because the stories of Abraham sound like historical stories and no scholars debate about the historical accuracy of the Bible and I suppose there's no way of ever determining once and for all the degree to which you might regard the accounts as equivalent to modern empirical history but this is a psychological interpretation of the biblical stories not a historical interpretation and it certainly does seem to be the case that from a psychological perspective we enter something like the domain of the modern conceptualization relatively modern conceptualization of history with Abraham beyond the accounts of divine commands that Abraham carries out this is from Freedman man I mentioned in the last lecture who wrote the disappearance of God a variety of other books that are well worth reading the narrative also includes a variety of stories in which Abraham acts on his own initiative he divides land with his nephew lot he battles Kings he takes concubines he argues with his wife Sarah on two occasion he tells Kings that Sarah is his sister out of fear that they will kill him to get his wife he arranges his sons marriage in the place of the single story of Noah's drunkenness there are in the case of Abraham the stories of a man's life and one of the things I was really struck by reading this in depth and read the commentary is how much like a story about a person it is you know Abraham isn't a divine figure in any in any archetypal sense precisely when he has archetypal elements because he's also obviously the founder of a nation but fundamentally he's a human being and and he makes he has the adventures and he makes the mistakes of a human being and that's it's the mistake part that really struck me you know because it did I was talking with a friend of mine this week Norman Doidge who's a very remarkable person in many ways and he was taking me to task he was reading my book which I'm going to publish sure which will be out in January and in in the book I in one section I contrasted the God of the Old Testament with the god of the New Testament and made the case sort of based on north of Freud's ideas that the God of the Old Testament was really harsh and judgmental you know and that the god of the New Testament was more merciful and you know at least to some degree more sweetness and light and Norman took me to task about that saying that that was a overly Christianized interpretation which would make sense because I derived it in part from Northrop Frye and I really have come to understand that more that he's right because that he's right about that because the God in the Old Testament is actually far more merciful than he's generally made out to be and you really see this with it's good news fundamentally if you regard the representation of God as somehow key to the description of being itself I mean Abraham makes a lot of mistakes you know serious mistakes and and yet he has a life and he's and he's blessed by God despite the fact that he's pretty deeply flawed and engages in deceptive practice I mean he's a good man but he's not a perfect man by any stretch of the imagination and and things work out really well for him and he's the founder of the nation and all of that and that's good news for everyone because perfect people are very very hard to find and if the only pathway to having a rich and meaningful life was through perfection then we would all be in deep trouble and so that that's very satisfying to read that and the other the other thing that I've been struck by is that you know Abraham and I think this is actually absolutely key to the interpretation of the story Abraham goes out and does things that's the thing and so one of the things that I've noticed in my life is that nothing I've ever done was wasted and by done I mean put my heart and soul into you know like like attempted with with all of my effort that always worked now it didn't always work the way I expected it to work that's a whole different issue but the payoff from it was always positive I always something always a something of value always accrued to me when I made the sacrifices necessary to do something worthwhile and so I think part of the message in in this in the story of a and the Abrahamic stories is go do something and and I thought about this in a variety of ways outside of the interpretation of this story because I have this program some of you might be familiar with which is called future authoring program and it's it's designed to help people make a plan for three to five years into the future you know and we so what you do is you you answer some questions it's a writing program you know answer some questions about how you would like your life to be what you would like your character to be three to five years down the road if you were taking care of yourself like you were taking care of someone that you actually cared about so you kind of have to split yourself into two people and treat yourself like you like someone you have respect for and that you want the best for now it's not easy because people don't necessarily have respect for themselves and they don't necessarily want what's the best for themselves because they have a lot of self contempt and a lot of self hatred a lot of guilt and a lot of existential angst and and a lot of self-consciousness and all of that and and so people don't necessarily take care of themselves very well and and I think it's I think it's I think you have an obligation it's one of the highest moral obligations to treat yourself as if you're a creature of value and and that is in some sense it's in some sense that's independent of your actions and you might think about that metaphorically as a recognition of your divine worth in the biblical sense regardless of your of your sins so to speak and I think that's that's that's powerful language as far as I'm concerned once you understand it anyways with the self authoring program the future authoring program you you ask you answer questions about what what how you would like your friendships to be conducted because it's useful to surround yourself with people who are trying to move forward and more importantly who are happy when you move forward and not happy when you move back backwards not when you fall that isn't what I mean but when you're doing self-destructive things your friends shouldn't be there to cheer you on and because then they're really not acting like friends obviously you know I know it's obvious but it still happens all the time and people allow it to happen it's not a good idea and you know how would you like to sort your family out and I was thinking about this this week too because I was thinking about Noah's Ark and there was a phrase in that story that I didn't understand which was that Noah was perfect in his generations I don't know what that means you know when you're when you're going through a book like the Bible if you don't understand the phrase that actually means you've missed something it doesn't mean that that's just not you know that's not germane to the story it means you're stupid you didn't get it man you didn't get it you didn't standard and so the idea that Noah was perfect in his generations and that's why he could build an ark that would sustain him and him and and humanity itself through the flood it meant that he not only did he walk with God which is something that we talked about in the context of the Sermon on the Mount but he established proper relationships with his family with his children and so what that meant was that his not only was he well integrated as a person but his level of integration had reached the point where it stretched out beyond him and encompassed his family and so it was Noah and the family that was in the ark and I can tell you and I really understood this this year because I had a very tumultuous year you could think about it from a personal perspective I could think about it as a year that had no shortage of floods and might and part of the reason that I was able to get through it I also had terrible health problems and one of the reasons I was able to get through it was because my family really came together around me my kids my wife my parents and my friends as well and particularly a certain group of friends and that's partly all of that came together in my mind that's we can I thought well that's what it means to be perfect in his generations meant that he hadn't just straightened himself out he'd also straightened out his relationships with his family and I can tell you that when crisis strikes you which it will it will the flood will come right that's why the apocalypse is always upon us the flood will definitely come in your life and to the degree that you've organized yourself psychologically and also healed the relationships between you and your family that could be the critical element that that determines whether you live or die when a crisis comes or or whether someone in your family lives or dies and so the idea of the Ark containing the man who's who walks with God and who's generations are perfect and that that's what sustains humanity through the crisis it's like you couldn't be more psychologically accurate than that no the other thing I was thinking about this weekend I was thinking about another line in the New Testament I think it's from the Sermon on the Mount but I'm not absolutely sure Christ compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a mustard seed and so I was thinking about a mustard seed as a very tiny seed and it grows into a spectacular complex plant and I was thinking about how you should operate in the world in order to make it a better place assuming that that's what you should be doing and that is what you should be doing and there's lots in the world to fix everything that bothers you about the world and about yourself should be fixed and you can do that and my dawning realization I have a friend he is in Montreal his name is James Simon he's a great painter and he's taught me a lot of things helped he's helped me design my house and beautify it and I bought some paintings from him a couple of years ago and he did this series of paintings where he went around North America and and stood in different places and then he painted the view from here down and so it's his feet planted in different places on roads in the desert on the ocean I have one actually hanging over my toilet which is him standing at a urinal yeah well you know he was trying to make a point and the point was that wherever you are it's worth paying attention and that's because you know so all these places that he visited he looked exactly where he was from standing by the side of the road in the desert sort of mundane in some sense but then maybe he put 40 hours into that painting you know it's very very realistic painting with really good light and what he's telling you as a painter is everything is worth paying attention to an infinite amount but you don't have enough time so the artist does that for you right the artist looks and looks and looks and looks and looks and then gives you that vision and so then you can look at the painting and it reminds you that right where you are is there's every everything that there is is right where you are and that's a hard thing to realize but it's actually true and so I've been telling people online in various ways and in lectures that they should start fixing up the world by cleaning up their room and I wanted to just elaborate on that a little bit before I get back to the lecture itself so as it's becoming this internet weird internet meme you know and and and it's a joke and good it's a joke I'm really happy about the fact that so much of this has got like the leaving of humor and it's really important because that's what stops things from degenerate getting into into conflict humor and I was thinking about this idea of cleaning up your room in relationship to the mustard seed idea and you see the thing about cleaning up your room this is also something I learned from Carl Jung and his study is on alchemy because for Jung when the alchemist was attempting to make the philosopher's stone he was not only engaged in the transformation of the material world but he was engaged in the process of self transformation that occurred at the same time as the chemical Trent as the chemical transformation so the psychological work in some sense let's say you want to sort out your room and beautify it because the beauty is also important and let's say that all you have is just a little room like you're not rich you're poor and you don't have any power that's another thing but you've got your damn room and you've got this space right in front of you you know that that's a part of the cosmos that you can come to grips with and you might think well what's there in front of you right in front of you and the answer to that is it depends on how open your eyes are that that's the proper answer because you could say and William Blake said this for example Aldous Huxley made comments that were very similar that in a transcendent state you can see infinity in the finite and you might say well you can say and you can see infinity and what you have within your grasp if you look and you could say maybe that's the case with your room and so you want to clean up your room well okay how do you do that exactly well a room is a room is a place to sleep and so if you say your room ups properly then you figure out how to sleep and when you should sleep and how you should sleep and then you figure out when you should wake up and then you figure out what clothes you should wear because they have to be arranged properly in your dresser then you have to have some place to put your clothes and you're going to have some clothes you have to figure out what you're going to wear those clothes to do right and then that means you have to figure out what you're going to do and then your room has to serve that purpose because otherwise it doesn't set up properly and if it doesn't set up if it doesn't serve your purposes you will be unhappy and not happy in the room because the way that we perceive the world is as a place to move from point A to point B in and then if the place that were in facilitates that movement then we're happy to be there and it's the place that we're in serves as an obstacle to that movement then we run happy to be there and so what it means to set up your room is that you have to have somewhere to go that's worthwhile or you can't set up your room and then your room has to be set up to facilitate that and then the next thing is well maybe you have to make it beautiful but that's not easy right that means you have to have some taste and that doesn't mean you have to have money it doesn't because you can be garish with money and you can be tasteful with nothing all you need is taste and taste beats money when it comes to beautifying things you know I mean not that money is trivial because it's not the taste is crucial and people who are very artistically oriented can make beautiful things out of virtually nothing and not only that the literature suggests that if you're going to make beautiful things putting real constraints on on what you allow yourself to do facilitates creativity instead of interfering with it because let's say you have to make something out of nothing right which I suppose would be a godly act right you have to make something out of nothing it you have to be creative in order to do that and so then to beautify your room means that you also have to develop your capacity to be creative and so then you can make your room shines but then what will happen is that if your family isn't together they will interfere with that you'll interfere with that because you won't have the discipline to do it properly but then when you start building this is this little microcosm of perfection with what you have at hand and Italy evoke all the pathologies of everyone in your household they'll wonder what the hell you're up to in there and they won't necessarily be happy because if you're if they're in a lowly place let's say and so are you and you're trying to move out of that then the higher you move out of that the more the place they're in looks bad and you might say well what they should do is celebrate your victory over chaos and evil but that isn't what will happen what will happen instead is that they will attempt to pull you back down they'll attempt to and I mean obviously all families don't do that but but all families do that to some degree and some families do almost nothing but that and so what that means is that if you're going to organize your room then you're going to have to confront the devil's in your house and that's often that's often a terrifying thing because some of those Devils have have lineages that go back many many many generations and god only knows what you have to struggle with in order to overcome that and so and so to sort your self out and to fix up your room is a non trivial matter you know and you can do that you'll learn by doing that and then maybe you'll learn enough by doing that so that you can fix up your family a little bit and then having done that you'll have enough character so that when you try to operate in the world at your job or maybe in the broader social spheres that you'll be a force for good instead of harm because you'll have learned some humility by noting just how difficult it was to put your damn room together well and yourself for that matter and so you'll proceed cautiously with your eyes open towards the good and so well those are some of the things I've been thinking about this week and they're Jermaine they're like they're germane to what we're going to discuss tonight because what happens at the beginning of the abrahamic stories is basically God comes to Abraham and just says go get going man do something do something get going and you might think well where should I go and God God is somewhat vague about that and where he sends Abraham it's a real fixer-upper man it's like there's starvation there and there's tyranny and there's and there's marital dissolution and there's deceit like it's it's just like where you live you know it's exactly the same thing it's it's it's tyranny and catastrophe so that's you know the the great the tyrannical Great Father because because Abraham ends up having to sojourn in Egypt and and there's a famine and so mother nature is on the rampage and Abraham lies about his wife as we'll see and so it's the world it's the world it's tyranny and and vulnerability and deceit and the other God says Gold because if you do go then you'll become a father of Nations and you think well again that's pretty good news although it's strange because you'd expect that if God chose Abraham then he'd send it immediately to the land of honey land of milk and honey and that isn't what happens at all it doesn't happen at all and Abraham never gets there but his mission is still regarded as divine and thank God for that because that's what your mission will be because that's what you will encounter in your life those are archetypal things everyone encounters is the tear of the social structure and and the rapaciousness of nature and the deceitful the deceitful quality of the human psyche it's like that's the world now it's a negative that's a negative view in some sense but it's positive in this story because what it basically says is something that's akin to the Sermon on the Mount which is that if you're aligned with God and you pay attention to the divine injunction then you can operate in the midst of chaos and tyranny and deception and flourish and you could hardly hope to have a better piece of news than that given that that's exactly where you are so and I didn't see any of that me Abrahamic stories to begin with so it's been very interesting to have that sort of reveal itself Baberaham section nuff develops the personality and characters of man to a new degree in biblical narrative well picturing him in a new degree of responsibility in him a new degree of responsibility so here's the other thing that's really struck me and I think this is absolutely crucial importance and I don't know how much importance but it's certainly important to me one of the things that has just blown me away in the last year because I've talked to lots of people lots of people live you know but also lots of people online but it's more obvious live and it's obvious in this theatre as well is that I've gone around and spoken and a large proportion of my audience is being young man young you know under 30 something like that and I've spoken to them a lot about responsibility and what's so odd about about this is that of all the things that I've spoken about if I can see the audience and I can feel how the audience is reacting because I'm always paying attention to all of you it's insofar as I can manage that so I get some sense of how what I'm saying is landing you know what you have to do if you're going to speak effectively to people and what what happens is if I talk about responsibilities everyone be is silent just like they are now it's silent and and not moving right focusing attentive say pick up your responsibilities pick up the heaviest thing you can and carry it and the room goes quiet and everybody's eyes open and I think whose makes me break up I was I don't I don't know why I was speaking to an English journalist today he was going to write an article in Spectator magazine I was talking about this and at the same point in the discussion the same I had the same emotional reaction I don't really understand it I think it's something something about it that's so crucial because you know we've been fed this unending diet of rights and freedoms and there's something about that especially there's something about that that's so pathologically wrong and people are starving for the antidote and antidote is truth and responsibility right and it isn't it isn't because that's what you should do and some you know and some some I know better or someone knows better for you what you should do sense it's that it's that it's that it's that that's the secret to a meaningful life and without the meaningful life and all you have is suffering and nihilism and despair and all about and self contempt and and that's not good and so the man it's necessary for men to stand up and take responsibility and they all know that and and are starving for that message and and the message is more that that's also a good thing to stand up and take responsibility because you're cursed so much now from come from from when you're young with this notion that you're active engaged with with the world is part of what is destroying and undermining the planet and adding to the tyranny of the social systems it's like how about not so much of that Hey because it's it is to soul deadening its anti human right to the car and my sense instead is that you know if you if you were able to reveal the best of yourself to you in the world that you would be an overwhelming force for good and that whatever errors might be made along the way would wash out in the works and that's the other thing that you see in the Abrahamic stories because Abraham is not a perfect person by any stretch of the imagination he's a real person and he makes mistakes but it doesn't matter the overarching narrative is you know maintain your covenant with God and despite your inadequacies then not only will you prevail but your descendants will prevail it's like great that's really good news you know so it's been really something to see that in the in the stories it's not that so that's responsibility it's not just that Abraham is kinder gentler more intrepid ethical or a better debater than his ancestor Noah rather both the Noah and Abraham stories are pieces of a development of an increasingly stronger stance of humans relative to the deity before the story is over humans will become a good deal stronger and bolder than Abraham oh that's really something to say because Abraham is pretty bold so we'll let's read the stories the first one is about Abraham Sarah and lot now these are the generations of Tara Tara begat Abram so his name is Abram to begin with and that actually turns out to be important it's not Abraham Nahor and Haran and Haran begat lot so Haran is Abraham's brother and Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his Nativity in ur of the Chaldees and Abram and Nahor took them wives the name of Abraham's wife was Sarai and the name of nahor his wife Milka the daughter of Haran the father of Milcah and the father visca but Sarai was barren she had no child and Terah took Abram his son and lot the son of Haran his son son and Sarai his daughter-in-law his son Abraham's wife and they went forth with them from the ur of Chaldees from ur of the Chaldees to go into the land of canaan that's exile and they came unto Haran and dwelt there and the days of Terah were 205 years and Terah died in Haran and there's a reason that Sarah is is introduced as barren and and it's to set the stage I think it was anton chekhov who when he was talking about the stage setting for a play that if there was a rifle hanging on the walls and it had better been used before I believe the second act or it shouldn't be hanging there at all right and so this is stage setting and I give part of the reason that the biblical writers are pointing out that Abraham's wife is barren is because it's a real catastrophe for Abraham oh and for Sarah as well that she's barren and so it's showing the trouble that Abraham's in at the beginning of the story and it's also it's also see what happens as the story progresses is that Abraham Abraham and Sarah are eventually granted the Sun but it's way late in the story and they're very very old by the time it happens and of course you're not going to be a father of Nations without having a child and so the writers are attempting to to make the case that if you forthrightly pursue that which God directs you to pursue let's say that all things are possible that's that's the idea in the narrative you know you might say that's naive and you know it's not it you think it when you're naive right and then you dispense with that idea and then when you stop being the sort of person who dispenses with ideas then you come to another place and that's the place where you think you have no idea what might be possible for you with you if you've got things together and pursued what you should pursue you don't know how much what's impossible to you right now would become possible under those conditions it's an unknown phenomena and like I've watched people who put themselves together across time you know incrementally and continually and they become capable of things that are taught not only jaw-droppingly amazingly but also sometimes metaphysically impossible to understand and so we don't know the limits of human endeavor we truly don't and it's premature to put a cap on what it is that we are what that what it is that we're capable of and so you you know you're already something and maybe you're not so bad in your current configuration but you might wonder if you did nothing for the next thirty years except put yourself together just exactly what would you be able to do and you might think well that's worth finding out but of course that's that's the adoption of responsibility and one thing I've also learned over the years because I've been curious about this battle between meaning and nihilism to know and I mean I mean I could see for a long while the rationale in nihilism and the power of the nihilistic argument but it occurred to me across time that despite that the power of the nihilistic argument is more powerful than naive optimism but it's not more powerful than the optimism that is not naive because the optimism that is not naive says it's self-evident that the world is place of suffering and that there are things to be done about that and it's self-evident that people are flawed and that there's things to be done about that and then the non naive optimist says the suffering could be reduced and the insufficient see could be overcome if people oriented themselves properly and did what they were capable of doing and I do not believe that that's deniable I do I do I think that human potential is virtually limitless and that there's nothing perhaps it's beyond our grasp if we're careful as individuals and as a society and so I think that there's no reason for nihilism that there's no reason for hopelessness and and there's no reason to bow down before evil because we're capable of so much more and I think that you can easily you know that first because you're not happy with who you are and you're ashamed and embarrassed about it as you should be and you know it because if you look out there you see people who are capable of doing great things and you know that we're not giving it our all and still we're not doing so badly you know and so you might wonder if if if we devoted 90% of our effort to putting things right instead of fifty-five percent of our efforts or maybe even less than that you might wonder just how well could things be put together and I think that you can figure that out by starting with your room by the way and the Lord said unto Abram and this is this is the this is the opening of the story get thee out of thy country and from thy kindred and from thy father's house unto a land that I will show thee and this is one of those phrases where every clause is significant go somewhere you don't understand that's the first thing get the out of thy country you know back in the 1920s there was a whole slew of American writers who ended up as expatriates in Paris Hemingway among them and and who wrote the Great Gatsby Fitzgerald yes and then a variety of others it was very inexpensive in Paris at the time and part of their transformation into great literary figures was the fact that they were out of their country and now they could see what their country was because you can't see what your country is until you leave it so you have to go into the unknown that's that's God's first command go into the unknown because you already know what you know and so and that's not enough unless you think you're enough and if you're not enough and you don't think you're enough then you have to go where you haven't been and so that's the first commandment to Abraham it's like okay that that's a good one that makes perfect sense go to where you don't know yes and from my kindred well that what does that mean means grow up right that's what it means it means get away from your family enough so that you can establish your independence and that isn't because there's something wrong with your family although perhaps there is you know as there is perhaps wrong with you but it means get away you know I talk to people very frequently whose families have provided them with too much protection and they know it themselves and that means they're deprived of necessity you know one of the things that you see in the United States for example is that the children of first generation immigrants often do better than the children they're children and the reason for that is that the children of first generation immigrants have necessity driving them and you don't know how much you need a necessity to drive you because maybe you're not very disciplined and if the catastrophe doesn't immediately befall you if you don't act forthrightly today then maybe you never act forthrightly right because the the gap between your foolishness and the punishment is is lengthened by your unearned wealth and so you never grow up and learn and you have to get yourself away from your dependency in order to allow necessity to drive you forward and that's to become independent and to become mature and I think part of what's happening in our culture is that the the force that's attacking the the fourth right movement forward of young men in particular is afraid of the power of men because it's confused about the distinction between power and authority and competence like an a man who's who has Authority and competence has power as a byproduct but the authority and competence is everything and and and people who can't understand that failed to make the distinction between power and authority of competence and they're afraid of power and so they destroy authority and competence and that's a terrible thing because we need authority and competence what else is going to what else is going to allow us to prevail in the long run and so you get away from your country and you get away from your kin and from your father's house right and you go out there and you establish yourself in the world it's a call to adventure that's what this the first lines in the Abrahamic story is a call to adventure so great unto a land that I will show you well you know what does that mean you know one of the things that I'd been struck very hard by a number of writers Carl young obviously among them I mean he he wrote things like Nietzsche that if you understand them they just break you into pieces you know and and one of the things that Jung understood in the psychoanalysts understand it's one of the most terrifying elements of psychoanalytic thinking is very tightly allied with religious thinking which is that you are not the master of your own house there are spirits that dwell in within you meaning you have a will and you can exercise a certain amount of conscious control over your being but there are all sorts of things that occur within you that seem to be beyond your capacity to control your dreams for example that's a really good example or your impulses for example you might you might think of those as so foreign from you that they're not even you don't even want them to be part of you but but more subtly even how about what you're interested in what compels you like where does that come from exactly because you can't you can't conjure it up of your own accord you know so if you're a student and you're taking difficult course you might say to yourself well I need to sit down and study for three hours but then you sit down and that is what happens your attention goes everywhere and you might say well whose attention is it then if it goes everywhere because you say it's your attentions like well if it's your attention maybe you would be able to control it but you can't and so then you might think well Jenin just exactly what the hell is controlling it and you might say well it's random it's the vall it's better not be random I can tell you that that's that happens to some degree in schizophrenia there's an element of randomness and it's not random it's driven by the action of phenomena that I think are best considered as something like subpersonalities although even that's only a partial description you can't make yourself interested in something interest manifests itself and grips you that's a whole different thing and so what is it that's gripping you and how do you conceptualize that is that a divine power well it's divine as far as you're concerned because it grips you and you can't do anything about it and so there's a calling in you towards what you're compelled by and what you're interested in and sometimes that might be very dark and sometimes not but you're compelled forward by your interest and so and so the idea that what moves you away from your country and your father's house and the comforts of your child at home is it's something that's beyond you and that you listen to and hearken to that's exactly right and you can say well I don't want to call that God it's like doesn't matter what you call it exactly it doesn't matter to what it is what it's called it still is and if you don't listen to it that's the other thing if you don't listen to it and I've been a clinician and talked to enough people now as old as I am to know this absolutely if you do not listen to that thing that beckons you forward you will pay for it like you cannot possibly imagine you'll have everything that's terrible about life in your life and nothing about it that's good and worse you'll know that it was your fault and that you squandered what you could have had so this is not only a calling forth but a warning unto a land that I will show thee and that's it that I will show thee that and you don't want to be too concrete about this you know there's all sorts of new territories that you can inhabit if you there's this abstract and conceptual territories of guilty University and you study biology or you study physics or or any discipline you're in a territory right you're in the territory that all the scholars have established and then as you master the discipline you move out beyond the established territory into the unknown and that's a new land right maybe it's even the land of your enemies for that matter but it's a new land the frontier is always in front of you and so you know when the earth was less inhabited than it is now the frontier was the psychological frontier and the geographical frontier was the same thing and now they've separated to some degree because there's not so much geographical volunteer but there's the frontier is a place that never disappears and the land that's beyond the land that you know is always there and it's always where you should go and all of that packed into these what four phrases so well so when I've been thinking about narrative you look at the world through a story you can't you can't help it and the story is what gives value to the world or or the story is what you extract from the value of the world you can look at it either way you're somewhere and it's not good enough right that's the eternal human predicament wherever you are isn't good enough and to some degree that's actually a good thing because if it was good enough well there's nothing for you to do so it's actually maybe a good thing that it's insufficient and that might be why sometimes having lessons is better than having more and I don't want to be a Pollyanna about that I mean I know that there's deprivation that can reach to the point where it's no where it's completely counterproductive but it isn't always the case that starting with little is you if you start with little you start with more possibility it's something like that so you moved from always from what's unbearable about the present to some better future right and if you don't have that then you have no you have nothing but threat and a negative emotion you have no positive emotion because the positive emotion is generated in the conception of the better future and then the evidence that you generate yourself that you're moving towards it that's where the positive and fulfilling meaning of life comes so you want to set up the structure properly it's very very important and so what it means is that you want to be going somewhere that's good enough so that the going is worth the while and you can ask yourself that and that's partly what we tried to build into the future authoring program which is well we know what's wrong with life it's rife with suffering and insufficiency and deception and evil it's all of that obviously okay what would make the journey worthwhile or you can ask yourself that it's like alright in order to bear up under this load what is it that I would need to be striving to attain and if you ask yourself that that's to knocking and the door will open that's what that means if you ask yourself that then you will find an answer and you'll think you'll shrink away from it you'll think well there's no way I could do that it's like well you don't know what you could do you don't know what's possible and you're not as much as you could be and so god only knows what you could what you could do and have and give if you sacrificed everything to it and that's the reason that Abraham is constantly making sacrifices and it's archaic right he's burning up like baby lambs but like well they're alive you know that's something and and they're valuable and that's something it's you have to admit even if you think about it as a modern person but the act of sacrificing something might have some dramatic compulsion to it you know to go out into a flock and to take something that's newborn and to cut its throat and to bleed it and to burn it might be a way of indicating to yourself that you're actually serious about something and it isn't so obvious that we have rituals of seriousness like that now and so it's not so obvious that we're actually serious about anything and so maybe that's not such a good thing and so maybe we shouldn't be thinking that these people were so archaic and primitive and superstitious it's possible that they knew something that we don't it's certainly in the or hammock stories one of the things that maintains Abraham's covenant with God is his continual willingness to sacrifice it it's so that sacrificial issue is so important because you are not committed to something unless you're willing to sacrifice for it commitment and sacrifice are the same thing and I think it's borders on miraculous that those concepts are embedded into this narrative at the level of dramatic action you know instead of abstract explanation people are acting this out and then the fundamental conception is so profound that it's really quite it's quite inspiring it's breathtaking really when you understand what message is trying to be conveyed you have to make sacrifices and what you have to sacrifice you have to sacrifice that which is most valuable to you currently that's stopping you and god only knows what that is it's certainly the worst of you it's certainly that and god only knows to what degree you're in love with the worst of you so well so you move from the unbearable present to the ideal future and and you can't help that you have to live in the structure like that that's your house that's another way of thinking about it and if you want to get your house in order and if it you want it to be a place that you can live properly then you have to plan the future that is perfect and then I think well what does that mean and it means it's good for you right and one of the things that I'm I do all the time with my clinical and consulting clients is trying to figure out what would be good for them but we do more than that we try to think okay well what how can we set this up so it's really good for you and that all the side consequences of that are things that are good for other people and so because people are often also tended about trying to get something that's good for themselves because they feel that it's selfish or that they don't deserve it so we set it up so that well look we're going to set it up so that it's plainly obvious that this will not harm the structure of the universe for you to have what you need and to do it in a way that's of benefit to other people there's no downside to that and so it's okay it's okay if you reach out and take that and one of the things that's interesting about the biblical stories Abrahamic stories as well is that God doesn't really seem to be opposed to the success of the people that he's chosen you know what happens to them is that they progress through their journey as they they get larger flocks and they they get more authority and they they get they get more they get life more abundant that's what happens it's God isn't does it seem to be a miser in the Old Testament it's like if you put in the effort and you and you accept the covenant and you make the sacrifices then you get to be successful and maybe successful beyond your wildest dreams and that that's actually seems to be okay with God and that's pretty cool given that you know that the general notion of Old Testament God is that all he's doing is casting out curses and death you know wherever he happens to wander and I mean there's certainly no shortage of that but but again it seems to me that that's very good news and that you also don't have to be perfect in order for to have that happen and then the other thing this is the issue about going into the unknown it's like well if you leave your country and your kin and your father's house and you go out into a land that your intuition guides you to you're going to undergo these radical transformations this is the sacrificial transformation too because you're you're moving forthrightly and voluntarily into chaos right and that's the same as the dragon fight that's the hero story and what will happen there is that you will transform yourself and so the call to an ideal is also the call to a sequence of deaths and rebirths that move you closer and closer to the ideal and that's what that's what God is calling Abraham to do in the first sentence of this story you see these things echoed in the strangest places and so these are stills that I took from Pinocchio and this little cricket so he's the still small voice right that's the thing that calls to you it's your conscious conscience and part it's your intuition in part and it's the thing that opens up the great book of the world the great sacred book of the world and that's what happens here right and the animators are at pains to show you that it's a leather-bound book with gilt lettering it's a valuable book and it's something that's quiet that's showing it to you right you have to meditate let's say you have to be somewhere where the world isn't drowning you out in order to understand how to open this to listen to that voice that tells you where you should go with what you should do next and then what happens is that something beckons to you in the night it's a star right it's something that transcends the horizon it's it's glitters it's brilliant it's it's not day to day it's something that's beyond you it's something that represents a transcendent ideal and that makes it manifest to you if you're quiet enough to listen and that's what you wish upon so strangely right and people do that they wish upon a star they teach their children that and they don't know why well what do you mean you wish upon a star what the world does that mean it means you lift your eyes to the heavens and make a pact with the transcendent and then you're and then what your hearts desire will come to you that's what it means and you think well that's so that's not naive it's the most sophisticated thing that you can know and it's the birth of the hero right because that's the that's the nativity star obviously and this is where it takes place it's just anywhere and the person it is just a carpenter and a toy maker but that's pretty good a carpenter if you're a deceitful carpenter then your house falls down and if you're a toy maker then you love children it's that's good start you know so so Geppetto who lives in this little it's it's a it's not a grand house it's it's just in every day house but everything that's happening and it is good and so that means it's it's a palace because everything in it is how that's happening good there's the saying and I don't remember where it comes from then it's better to have bread and water in peace than a feast in conflict and that's not a saying that's just the starkest possible description of the truth because there's nothing worse than eating a grand meal with people you hate and despise that are at each other's throats it's much better to have bread and water in peace it's it's not it it's just clear-headed analysis of the structure of the world to say things like that and so the magical transformation can happen in the most mundane of places because and the reason for that is that the mundane nature of places is an illusion because every place is the potential birthplace of the kingdom of God that's the case and so Geppetto he's a good guy he has a kitten you know the kitten likes him he makes puppets and he's humble person and he knows that compared to the ideal that he's attempting to subscribe to that he's he's not a based before it or anything like that he's not despicable in relationship to it but the reason he's on his knees is because the thing he's pointing at is above him you know he he it wouldn't be the right aim if it wasn't above him and so the fact that he's on his knees so to speak is only an indication that his aim is proper because you should be on your knees to something that you actually admire and if you don't feel like being on your knees in front of it then perhaps you don't actually admire it and then that means you haven't got the stage set properly it could be it should be something that fills you with awe your aim should should be add something that fills you with awe because whatever why do something else well perhaps because it's easy and perhaps because it's malevolent and all of those things but but those are no answer to the problems that beset you they just make things worse and that's clear and so then Gepetto have is having made his pact his covenant just like Abraham he falls into a dream right he falls into a dream and the rest of the movie actually takes place in a dream and it's a dream it's the dream within which transformation takes place and that's laid out at least in part time stops in in the pinocchio story and everything happens to Pinocchio in some sense in a land it's outside of normal time and that's that's the infinite archetypal space and that's a real place that's a real place the infinite and the finite coexist and most of the time we're in the place of the finite but that doesn't mean that the place of this infinite doesn't exist it just means that we can't get access to it we just get intimations of it from time to time you know when things are going perfectly well for you on those rare occasions where everything comes together for the brief moment you inhabit that divine place and you have some sense of what your life could be like if you organized it from the smallest element to the largest element and that's a place that you can inhabit if not forever in a manner that at least felt like forever well because of Gepetto's decisioned the transcendent manifests itself it takes the form of the blue fairy here that's the positive element of nature right so we could say well nature it's not so clear that she's on your side right she's the Red Queen and Alice in Wonderland who runs around screaming when you go down the rabbit hole she runs around screaming off with their heads and who says in my kingdom you have to run as fast as you can just to stay in the same place that's mother nature but then we might say well how do we know that mother nature's attitude towards you isn't negative because your attitude towards things isn't proper and that's what this film attempts to indicate the idea is that if you aim properly then nature aligns itself behind you now it also arrays itself in front of you perhaps even as an antagonist but the power that it it it provides you with from within might be sufficient to overcome it from without and i think that i think that the clinical evidence is clear about that because one of the things that we do know is that if you take people who are confronting terrible things and shrinking from them and you teach them how to structure their behavior so that they can advance with courage everything works better for them their fears decrease and their character grows and so there might be enough of nature within us to help us withstand the nature that's outside of us and it depends at least to some degree and how it is that we orient ourselves in the world to some into some unknowable degree now Geppetto wants an autonomous individual as a son and that's also something that makes him a great person because autonomous individuals have their own will and if you're a tyrant it's the last thing that you're going to want and if you're the tyrant who's jealous of his son it's even more so the last thing you're ever going to want and so to aim high and to want the development of the autonomous individual are the same thing and I would say that's the core story in some sense of Western culture is that to aim high and to develop the autonomous individual are the same thing and that's what happens in Pinocchio that's what happens in the story of Abraham and the transformation takes place the magical transformation and in the Pinocchio story one of the things that's so interesting about it and this is part of its mythological substructure from the scientific perspective there's only two determining forces with regards to the destiny of the individual there's nature deterministic and culture deterministic and then scholars wrangle about which of those is the greater force but in mythological stories there's always a third element and that third element is something like autonomous consciousness and there's no place for autonomous consciousness in the deterministic story of nature and culture but we all act as if autonomous consciousness is the primary reality and the biblical stories are predicated on the idea that autonomous consciousness is what gives rise to the world and I don't think that we're in a position to presume that that is necessarily in error and so what that means is to aim high and to develop the autonomous individualist is simultaneously the decision to formulate an allegiance with the the conscious power that brings being into existence and that all takes place inside this little puppet and then he has his adventures right he's he's he's still half jackass and half deceptive but he still despite that and despite all the errors he has the capacity to move forward and to transform it into something to transform himself into something that can be properly considered described as a true son of God and that's the Rite Aid and it works like this as far as I can tell you know when I talk to people about doing the Future authoring program they often put it off and it's not surprising because it's hard and and be it but it's more than that they think well I don't know how to write I'm going to do a bad job I don't really like assignments I'm going to have to do it perfectly I need to wait till I have enough time and like one of those is enough to stop you cold and all five of them you're just done and so I tell people do it haphazardly a tiny bit at a time and badly because you can do that I tell my students when they're doing their thesis master's thesis write a really bad first draft and then we have a little conversation about that because they don't think I mean that because it sounds like a cliche in some sense it's not a cliche it's not a cliche at all it means you're a terrible writer but but if someone put a gun to your head and said you have to have your hundred page pieces done by next Monday or I'll shoot you but I don't care how terrible it is you would sit down and write it and the thing is then you have it right then then you have something and then you can fix it you could iterate and fix it that bad first draft that's the most valuable thing and so that's what you need you need a bad first draft of yourself and there's there's an idea that young developed about the trickster and the Jester the comedian right that the trickster is the precursor to the Savior that's one of the things I learned from young it was just it's so unlikely you never think that it's so amazing that that my be the case but the the the satirical in the Iran Akande and the troublemaker that the comedian the fool the fool is the precursor to the savior why because you're a fool when you start something new and so if you're not willing to be a fool then you'll never start anything new and if you never start anything new then you won't develop and so the willingness to be a fool is the precursor to transformation and that's the same as humility and so if you're going to write your destiny you can do a bad first job you're going to get smarter as you move forward that's the thing is that so something beckons to you that's what happens here maybe the star that Geppetto wished on was the wrong damn star but at least it was a star right at least it was in the sky at least it moved him forward and so you say in your life well something grips you and it fills you with interest and you think well should I do that an answer is if not that then something what if it's a mistake it's a mistake rest assured what do you know you're going to stumble around right and what's going to happen is this you're going to move to you're going to not stay in stasis you're not going to wander around in circles and I see people like that they said well I never knew what to do and now I'm 40 it's like that's not so good that's not so good and you might say well and there is a literature too that suggests that people are a lot more unhappy when they look back in their lives about the things they didn't do than they are about the mistakes they made while they were doing things and so that's really worth thinking about too because there's redemptive mistakes and a redemptive mistake would be a mistake that you make when you go out and try to do something you know you actually you think okay I'm going to try to do this when you're not good at it you make a bunch of mistakes it's like what's the consequence if you pay attention is you're not quite so stupid anymore that's the thing is you've been informed by your by the results of your errors and so what happens is you follow the beacon you follow the light and and you're blind so you don't know where the light is it's dimly apprehended only and you're afraid to follow it but you decide to take some stumbling steps towards it and as you take stumbling steps towards it you become illuminated and enlightened and informed because of the nature of your experience because you're pushing yourself beyond where you are and you're going into the country that you have not yet been in and you learn something and so what happens then is the star moves you move 10 feet towards it you think no that's not right I didn't get it right it isn't there it's actually there and so then you you see it somewhere else and you shift yourself slightly and you move forward and that's what happens is that you continue as you change the thing that guides you forward moves right it's like God in the in the in the desert in Egypt the pillar of light that you're following it's moving it's not a permanent thing you move towards it it moves away it guides you forward and so you say well is what I'm aiming at paradise itself and the answer to that is no because what do you know you you couldn't see paradise if it was right in front of you but you might get a glimmer of it and so you move towards it and you grow and then the next time you open your eyes you see a little bit more clearly and that's what happens is that just happens over and over right it keeps moving and so you move like this but the thing that's so cool is that although zigs and zags you say in each of those zags is it and zigs is a catastrophe I hit a wall my god and then I had to die a little bit and I barely got back up it's a Phoenix transformation at each at each turn and it's painful but the thing is is that even though you've you've traveled 20 miles let's say on that road and you've only moved 3 miles forward you've moved three miles forward instead of falling backwards because that's the thing too is that if you stand still you fall backwards you cannot stand still because the world moves away from you if you stand still and there's no stasis there's only backwards and so if you're not moving backward back forwards then you're moving backwards and that's more more of the underlying truth of the Matthieu principle to those who have everything more will be given from those who have nothing everything we'll be taken it's a warning do not stay in one place well as you dig and zag maybes and maybe the Cataclysm of each transformation starts to lessen there's not so much of you that has to die with every mistake and maybe you end up oriented at least reasonably properly if you were sensible that would have been your trip but it wasn't right it's that and perhaps it's a lot worse than that perhaps there's no shortage of backtracking but it doesn't matter because as you stumble forward you illuminate and inform yourself and perhaps that's partly because the world is made of information and if you encounter it and tangle with it then it informs you and then you become informed and then your information and then you're ready and so God says to Abraham I will make of thee a great nation and I will bless thee and make thy name great and thou shalt be a blessing that's that's a good offer fundamentally I mean it means what does it mean to to be made a great nation of well perhaps it has something to do directly with your descendants but I don't think it's just that you know is if you're a force for good in the world then that radiates out from you and if you're good enough it's difficult to say how much of an impact on things you could have you know Dostoyevsky who is a very crazy person partly because of his epilepsy he said a man is not only responsible for everything he does but for everything that everyone else does and you think well no no no and yes sometimes no sometimes that's what you think if you're cataclysmic cataclysmically depressed right is that your sins are so egregious that that they're unforgivable and that in some manner you're at you're at fault for everything that's terrible with world but there's actually truth than that and there's actually redemptive truth in that is that things wouldn't be so bad if you weren't so if you weren't so far from what you could be and that's terribly pessimistic because it's all on you man but it's terribly optimistic because God there's a lot of things that you could do and if you're crying out for something to do then that's the best news you could possibly have it's like things aren't so good but you know are you so if you stop doing the things that you knew to be destructive which is the right place to start you know if you're going to clean up your room what do you do first well you just get rid of the mess you know and you know what now no one has to come in and tell you hopefully what's the worst mess it's just it announces itself to you and you can certainly know yourself and this is a very easy meditative exercise to sit down and think okay I'm doing one thing really stupidly that I should stop doing it's like how long is it going to take you to figure out what that is it's about two seconds right you've known it forever but you could even make it less demanding you could say there are some stupid things that I'm doing that I know are stupid and wrong that I could stop doing that I would stop doing and then you can just start with that and you can just do that and maybe it's just a little thing although it's not because it's it's a it's a step forward on the proper voyage it's not a small thing and you think well what would happen you could say let's do this for a year even a month just try not to do things you know to be stupid and wrong for a month and that means not to say things you know to be stupid and wrong as well maybe that's the most important thing just do it as an experiment see what happens and so fun because I have people writing to me from all over the world who are saying they're doing that they're saying well you know I cleaned up my room and and then I stopped saying stupid things and my god it's like things are way better it's like who would have guessed it you know and so it's low-hanging fruits man because they're saying that's the other thing if there's a lot of things wrong with you then it's it's really easy to start fixing it you know you got so much there's so much territory that you can inhabit I will make of thee a great nation I will bless thee that's good I mean the whole nation thing that's positive but to have God on your side that's you know you might want that when things get rough that would be good and make that name great and now it shall be a blessing wonderful that's a good deal then I will bless them that bless thee that's good too and curse him that curseth thee and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed that's something that's something that wouldn't it be something if you could wake up and your day was composed in part of people thanking you for all the good things you've done in the world would that be good it's not impossible for that to happen so Abram departed yes as the Lord had spoken unto him and Lord went with and the neighbor him was seventy in five years when he departed out of her and that's all now Abraham lives a long time but this is also part of the story so he has a wife who can't have children he has nothing obviously he's been hanging around dad's Shack for a little too long given that he's 75 right it's kind of time to get a fire lit underneath him a bit and so it is not got much going for him but he still decides to to move forward and I've seen this too you know like if you don't have your destiny in hand by your time you're thirty it's it's rough you start hurting and if you don't have your destiny in hand by the time you're 40 then you really start hurting and 40 is a real fork in the road the fork in the road that's always where you meet the devil by the way and that's because every time you have to make a decision the possibility of evil beckons that's why that is I had a friend I told you a little about him and he killed himself just after 40 you know he had had a book published and with a very small press he was quite a good writer but he could not get himself together and it hit him too hard at 40 and I'm not saying that it's hopeless at 40 I'm not saying that and I'm not saying that partly because of these verses but also partly because of in my clinical practice I've had people come to me who have had very chaotic and ill-spent lives let's say who were in that neighborhood of age and and it's true for people who are older as well who then decided to make a real effort and to try to make where they were better you know instead of being bitter about where they weren't because that's better nasteria lee does you in it's really not good it's the opposite of gratitude it's it's it's the manifestation of resentment it makes you malevolent it's very very bad to be better it's not it's not it's hell to be bitter and if you're 40 and you're not successful then you have to accept your lot and you have to start to improve what's right in front of you and if you do that it doesn't take very long it's quite interesting to watch people things can be a lot better in six months and they can be way better in two years like it's a struggle uphill struggle but it's by no means impossible and and I don't know again what the limit of that is I suppose it depends to degree to some degree on the degree of your commitment but anyway so abran other indication of the real validity of this story God isn't setting this up to be easy right Abraham's old and his and his wife is old too and more than that she's barren how is he going to be the father of Nations how is he going to be successful well the initial departure point is insufficient radically insufficient and and that's very inspiring because it means that you can start from where you are so Abram departed as the Lord had spoken unto him and lot went with him and Abram was 75 years old when he departed out of Haran and Abram took Sarai his wife and lot his brother's son and all their substance that they had gathered and they know he has a relationship with law right he doesn't have his own son but he his brother died and so he takes his nephew as his son that's grateful you know he could be very angry and have nothing to do with him because he didn't get his own son but that isn't that isn't what happens is he's offered a substitute let's say and he accepts it and so good for him you know and and that's an it's also something that I've seen that characterizes people who can make the best of a bad lot is they don't get exactly what they want but something comes along that offers possibilities that are sufficient perhaps if exploited properly and they open their heart and welcome them in instead of rejecting them in bitterness and so that's a good thing and that's part of Abraham's character and Abram took Sarai his wife and law his brothers son and all their substance that they had gathered and all the souls that they had gotten in her on and they went for us to go into the land of Canaan into exile let's say and into the land of Canaan they came and that's another repetition of the transformation story right you have to go to a land where you're not welcome an abram passed through the land unto the place of CGM unto the plain of mora and the Canaanite was then in the land and the Lord appeared unto Abram and said unto thy seed I will give you this land and there he builded an altar to the Lord who appeared unto him and he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of the cell and pitched his tent having the fell on the west and high on the east and there he built an altar unto the Lord and called upon the name of the Lord now we don't understand these rituals precisely you know I don't know if the people who did this engaged in a meditative ritual without the idea that you take something of value you do this youyou undertake this dramatic transformation a life and death transformation and is that an aid to meditation and what you do do you sit down and thank you you pray pray being to ask you know - what do I do next how do I orient myself in the world as a useful exercise to do that - I think it's something that people could do every morning I think it's useful to sit down and think okay what's the most important thing I should do today what I have an array of things that call to me to be done some of which I will do with joy and some of which I will bear as responsibilities but I raised em selves in front of me and with what should I attend to first well do you ask or do you decide and it seems to me when I do it because I do it all the time I do it every morning I try to sit down and think okay I've got things that I would like to do and things that call to me out of necessity what do i do first and it's not so much a decision as it is a question and I don't know what I'm calling on it's I'm calling on my capacity to think I suppose but that's not my capacity exactly I'm there I can I can commune with whatever provides answers and I can think that that's me thinking but and I didn't that I believe that I can't think I do believe that I can consciously think but that's not the same as calling for inspiration it's not the same process just like a dream is not conscious thinking it's something that happens to you and that kind of inspiration is also something that happens to you because I ask myself well what's the most important thing I could do next and then I have an answer to that but it isn't because I decided exactly I've decided that I'll do it whatever it is and that I want to know what it is those are the decisions but but there's an involuntary aspect to the sorting that occurs and and that's the psychological equivalent I suppose to this and I guess the sacrifice is when I feel that I will do whatever it is that calls to be done then I don't do the other things that I might want to do and that's a sacrifice it's to me it's the proper sacrifice because my sense is that things don't go properly unless you do what's most important and if I want things to go properly and I do because I've had my taste of things not going properly I want things to go properly and so then it's not so difficult to do what's necessary to to do what makes things go properly under those circumstances and it's partly see this is partly why the story of Sodom and Gomorrah is embedded in the Abrahamic stories I think because that's an apocalyptic story right if things go badly enough the whole city is destroyed and then and the reason it goes badly is because the people in the city do not behave properly and the people in the city might bu and so if you're not behaving properly then you go and so does the city and maybe you don't want maybe you do want that but maybe you don't want that and if you don't want that then maybe and you know that if you don't do things property then it's you and the city if you actually know that then maybe that terrifies you badly enough so that you're willing to make the sacrifice to do the right things instead of the impulsive things that you might otherwise want to do you know I learned from Viktor Frankl and from Karl yoga and from Alexander Solzhenitsyn and for many of the people whose works on the Holocaust that I read and on the catastrophes in the Soviet Union and the people who studied it most deeply always came to the same conclusion the state became corrupted because each individual allowed themselves to be corrupted or perhaps participated joyfully in the process of being corrupted and the consequence of that was the end of the world and so what that means is that if you don't behave properly then you bring about the end of the world and maybe you think well that's only the end of your world fair enough or maybe it's the only the end of your family's world you know which I suppose might give you some pause but there's more to it than that because you're connected to everyone else and what you do that isn't good distributes itself and all the things you don't do that could be good take away from the whole and so if you know that and I do think you know that if you take it seriously because if you look at if you look at historical events the cataclysmic events of the 20th century seriously I do not think that you can fail to come to that conclusion and Abraham journeyed going on still towards the south that's interesting because to go south means to go downhill too it's not good to go south it's colloquial for going to where you shouldn't go and this is what happens to Abram you know he his a cent is preceded by a descent and that's very common in life I would say and so it's a little the redemptive element of this narrative is that if the Covenant is constructed properly so it's an arc which is your decision to align yourself with God for all intents and purposes then even the journey south can be part of a broader journey upward and there was a famine in the land that's Mother Nature failing to cooperate I mean that's going to be pretty disheartening for Abraham don't you think is he finally gets it together when he's 75 to leave and then you know because God says well do you not get going and and so the first place he goes everyone's starving to death it's like you know you might think about that as a test of faith wouldn't you say but he keeps going and then what happens well he has to go to Egypt so great he goes where he's starving where everyone's starving and then to get away from where everyone's starving he goes to a tyranny so the whole beginning of the story is not particularly auspicious and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there for the famine was Grievous in the land it's a repetition of the same idea again there's downhill voyage out into chaos right it's repeated over and over that the beginning of Abraham's journey is basically a sequence of of experiences of Exile chaos tyranny and catastrophe well you should be able to relate to that you know how hard it is to get things together you know you go out to do what you're supposed to do say and there's you're beset by the intransigence of the world and failure well so what are you supposed to do about that well maintain your faith in the good and continue to move forward that's the idea and part of that even if even if you don't buy the metaphor it's like what are you going to do instead that won't make it worse so even if there it isn't enough that you're pursuing your at least for stalling the transfer may of the chaos into your of your life into sheer hell and that can certainly happen you know you see people who are having a terrible time and then you see people who are having a terrible time who are also in hell and it's a lot better to just have a terrible time than to have a terrible time and be in hell at the same time and it came to pass when he was come too near to enter into Egypt that he said unto Sarai his wife behold now I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon therefore it shall come to pass when the Egyptians shall see thee that they shall say this is his wife and they will kill me that they will save thee alive so look I mean Abraham is Abram is really having a rough time he's a failure right I mean he's wandering around through the land of starvation now he's going to go be a quasi slave in Egypt he has this incredibly attractive wife and all he can look forward to is the fact that the most successful man in Egypt the Pharaoh will take her from him so he's got the whole embitterment thing pretty much nailed down as far as I can tell and this is when he makes one of his errors let's say and one of the errors that humanizes him say I pray thee that thou art my sister that may be well for me for thy sake and my soul shall live because of thee and it came to pass that when Abram was coming to Egypt the Egyptians beheld the woman that was she was very fair the Prince is also a pharaoh saw her and commended her before Pharaoh and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house and he entreated Abram well for her sake and he had sheep and oxen and he houses and menservants and maidservants as she houses and camels so actually things work out pretty well for for Abram despite his deceit right which is quite interesting and I guess it's because if the overarching structure is solid something like that it's something like that then then errors can still be forgiven to speak about it from a metaphorical perspective and the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abrams wife well it doesn't seem very fair but because the Pharaoh didn't know but but it's not the right way to look at it the right way to look at it see there's a story later in the in the Bible about David and David David could be a pretty bad guy you know so one of the things he does is when he becomes king he's in his castle and he's looking over the city and he sees a woman nude bathing nude sunbathing nude on a roof out on the city and he's smitten by her floored by her and he has inquiries made about who she is her name is Beth Sheba and and he finds out who her husband is and her husband actually happens to be a general in his army and he arranges for that general to be put at the thick of the battle and killed and then he takes Bathsheba so and and and the Lord is not pleased by that let's put it that way and that's interesting is only did it's an interesting story because you might say well why can't the King do whatever the hell he wants like seriously he's the king he's not just he's not like the Prime Minister the president right he's the king and so you might say well why is the King subject to any rules whatsoever what's the rationale for the king being subject to rules well the rationale emerges in these stories if there are social strictures that are such that even if the ruler of the land transgresses against them there will be hell to pay and that's continually presented over and over in the biblical stories and it's a natural law sort of idea that there are there are intrinsic rules to the game of social human being and if you and maybe intrinsic rules to this to the natural state of human being you break those rules consciously or unconsciously at your absolute peril and not only at your peril but at the peril of the state and it doesn't matter who you are and so I would say this is actually an indication of God being fair rather than being unfair because the rule here is Pharaoh or not you don't get to take someone else's wife and the ignorance is no excuse now you might say that's a little bit harsh and perhaps it is a little bit harsh but it's not without merit the idea is not without merit and of course Abram is implicit in this despite that he is successful and Pharaoh called Abram and said what is this that thou has done unto me why did so now tell me that she was thy wife why said Stowe you she is my sister I might have taken her to me to wife now therefore behold thy wife take her and go thy way and Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him and they sent him away and his wife and all that he had and Abram went out of Egypt he and his wife and all that he had in lot with him into the south and Abram was very rich in cattle in silver and in gold and that's it so what's interesting you know big Abraham he he goes to the place of famine and then he goes to the to the place of charity and then he he lies and then he almost loses his wife but because he goes things work out for him and so hooray for that and he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning between Bethel and high unto the place of the altar so he makes another sacrifice which he had made there at the first and there Abram called on the name of the Lord well so he's had an adventure right he's he's he's finished his journey and and so there's a culminating point in this narrative and now I just know what to do he's left the place he said he doesn't know what to do so it's time to build an altar and make a sacrifice and figure out and to ask for divine guidance once again to figure out okay well I've done that been there done that what's next and I'm the question is asked seriously and this is something to consider if you want to know what to do ask seriously and say I'm willing to see Abraham sacrifices a life to his vow well so what do you do well you don't sacrifice an animal you don't you don't make a blood sacrifice you do it psychologically you say I'm going to sacrifice my life to the same that's what you do if you're serious what do I do next well I'm going to sacrifice my life to this aim what is it that I should do that's worth sacrificing my life to that's a serious question well then maybe that's the sort of question that people don't ask because they're afraid of the seriousness of the question and and what the magnitude of the potential answer do you really want to know what you should do that would be worth sacrificing your life to well the answer is yes because it's worth it but the answer is also no because what really it's your life you know what if you're wrong and you're probably wrong but maybe that doesn't matter maybe it doesn't matter because maybe the rightness is in the process and not in the and not in the decision right because it's not it's the beginning of a sequence of decisions as we've already pointed out to the place of the altar which he had made there at the first and there Abram called on the name of the Lord and Lord also and Lord also which went with Abraham Abram had flocks and herds and tents and the land was not able to bear them that they might dwell together for their substance was great so that they could not dwell together and there was a strife between the herdsmen of Abrams cattle the Cowboys and the herdmen of lost cattle and the Canaanite and the perizzite dwelled then in the land well that's interesting too because you know Abraham's having a pretty good time of it now right he's out of starvation hey that's good he's out of the tyranny now he's kind of wealthy and then the story flips on him he's wealthy and now a bad thing happens to him right it's that he's got all this wealth and so does his nephew now they can't get along because they have too much stuff so that's quite comical as well that I think that's a comic interlude here now they handle it properly and Abram said unto Lord let there be no strife I pray they between me and thee and between my herdmen and I heard them because we're brothers it's not the whole land before they separate thyself I pray thee from me if you'll take the left then all take the right or if you depart to the right then I'll go to the left so basically they sit down and say well you know one of us has got to get out of town and it can be one or the other it doesn't really matter we can flip a coin or but we have to we have to separate and so they do it amicably and Lord lifted up his eyes and looked at all of the plain of Jordan that it was well watered everywhere so that's an intimation of Eden right because you remember he even means well watered place before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah even as the Garden of the Lord like the land of Egypt as thou comest unto Zoar so interesting you get foreshadowing here again right so Lawton Abram are making the decision about where to go and and law it looks out and and sees a reasonable place but then this warning comes up that there's a city out there there's a place out there where things are not going to go well things are being done badly and things are not going to go well then Lord shows him all the plain of Jordan and law journeyed East and they separated themselves the one from the other Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan and lot dwelled in the cities of the plain and pitched his tent towards Sodom but the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly now the word sin I've mentioned this to you before I think it's an interesting word it's it's the derivation of an archery term in my understanding of its derivation and it the Greek word was hamartia and Hammar he is an archery term which means to to miss the bullseye and you think it's worth thinking about that metaphorically because you've got to think about all the ways that you could miss the bullseye right you can close your eyes that's very common you could just not lift up the damned bow and arrow to begin with you could face the wrong way you could be unskilled in your aim but I'm and I also like the the archery metaphor because human beings are built on a hunting platform right and we always aim at things were things that were ballistic creatures on a trajectory always and we're always aiming at something we're always aiming at the mark and which is of course what you do when you hunt right because you have to hit the mark precisely and that's what we're like and so what we're like that psychologically we have to aim at something and then move towards it and and so to sin is to miss the mark is to is to miss the bullseye to to fail to take aim to aim badly gain carelessly or to not aim at all and that says well that's that's like a sin of omission that's to not do and then to be wicked is to aim at what you know you shouldn't aim at and again I don't I don't think of that as an external morality precisely I think that you can read the entire biblical narrative again from a psychological perspective and say we're not talking about external codes of conduct here although we could we're not the wickedness that's being described is the act of you doing something that you know to be wrong period you know and you may do something you don't know if it's wrong or not that isn't a sort of thing that we're talking about and we're not talking about the things that you do that are right there that other people think are wrong we're not talking about those either we're talking about those things that you consciously do although you know them to be wrong yourself and that's the things that seem to get people into the most trouble in these stories and I believe that to be the case I think that's very accurate psychologically it's amazing because I see this all the time if you do something wrong it's because you're Stig nur n't you don't know better it doesn't go well for you that's the case but if you do something wrong and you know it's wrong the punishment is is manifold and I think the reason for that I think the reason for that is because that makes you Cain it means you betray your own ideal right if you just don't know well you haven't betrayed your ideal you're just not together maybe you're even willfully blind but if you do something you know to be wrong then you've betrayed your own ideal and that lands you Cain says to God once Cain destroys Abel he says I cannot bear my punishment and the Lord said unto Abram after that lot was separated from lift up now thine eyes look upward and look from the place where thou art northward and southward and eastward and westward for all the land which thou seest to thee I will give it and to thy seed forever and I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth so that if a man can number the dust of the earth then shall all the I seed be numbered arise walk through the land in the length of it and the breadth of it for I will give it unto thee in the cathedral at shark I can't say that properly because my French is non-existent so a cathedral is across and the transformation takes place at the crux of the cross which is exactly right because the transformation takes place at the point of maximal suffering and the cathedral is designed to indicate that right symbolically now what happens in the religious ceremony is also a journey and it's a journey in some sense to the holy city and then that's also played out in the idea of pilgrimage right because you go to the holy city actually you go to Jerusalem or wherever it is that you think the holy city is you go there and that takes you out of your country and away from your kin and away from your family into the strange land and as you make the journey you transform and when you come back you're not the same that's the Hobbit right that's the story of the Hobbit but let's say you can't afford to go on a pilgrimage so you go to the cathedral at Chartres and there's a huge maze on the ground and it's the world north west south and east just as God describes here so it's laid out and you enter the maze at one side and in the middle is a stone pattern that looks like a flower and it's it's the place where being wells forth and it's at the center of the Cathedral and what that means is that if you accept your suffering then you move to the place where the spirit of being wells forth that's what that means and so you enter the maze and you walk and it's divided into quadrants and you walk one quadrant completely and then the mains pathway takes you into the next quadrant and you walk that completely and then it takes you to the third one and the fourth one and then when you walk the maze completely everywhere when you've gone everywhere in the world north south east and west where you when you traverse the territory completely then you come to the center and then it's yours and that's what this is so I've noticed when I've been renovating houses I like to do that I paid a lot of attention to the psychological process of a house renovation because I learned from young that young said this this is something man he said if he was he was talking about the stages of integration psychological integration and he looked beyond Piaget I would say although Piaget looked very far he said here's a conjunction you have to get your rationality on your emotion together that's a male/female conjunction symbolically speaking male rationality female emotionality you want to bring those together so that they're oriented in the same direction your emotions in your rationality served the same purpose so then you're unified in mind and spirit let's say that's are good enough once you've got that together then there's a boat you have a body and then that's a male/female conjunction again a divine conjunction the recreation of Adam before his division into female and male and the reconstruction of the androgynous Christ that all that all those ideas are linked together so now you have your emotion and your rationality moving in the same direction but you're not acting it out so now you have to unite that abstract part of you with your body and start acting out what you think and feel and that's the next conjunction but it's not the last one the last conjunction is when you realize that there is no distinction between you and your experience they're the same thing and so then when you put together your house you're putting together yourself so I've noticed in when I've lived in places rented or owned didn't matter and if there were part of the place if there was a part of the place that I hadn't attended to whatever that might mean it might meant cleaned it might have meant fix but it certainly meant at least thoroughly investigated then that was chaos it was like it was it was like the desert that part that's that's a way of thinking about it it wasn't mine even if I owned it wasn't mine I had to interact with it before it became mine and I had to interact with it and I had to put it in order and then it became mine and then and then to the degree that it became mine and was in order then I was also put in order now you know that because you go into places that make you uncomfortable and maybe it's your own house it's highly probable it's highly probable I you know I walk into well Chinese doctors do this traditional Chinese doctors they go into place people's place and they they diagnose their health conditions on the on the balance of yin and yang chaos an order they walked into a house that this is easy to do you walk into a house there's too much chaos hey you can detect that in no time flat everything is out of order and chaotic you don't even want to be there you certainly don't want to open the refrigerator that's for sure and there are things that should have been done years ago everywhere and every one of those things is a fight that hasn't happened and something that's being avoided and you can't even walk in there and maintain your health this is you walk in there you're sicker than you were when you were outside and that's one sort of place and then another sort of place is you go and look at the living room and the person has vacuumed the living room rug and the lines that were vacuumed are parallel to one another and the and the furniture is covered with plastic and you get a glass of water and then just as you're going to set it down on the coffee table the person rushes over and puts a coaster underneath it and everything in that house says to you that it would be a lot more perfect in that house if you were either not there or dead and that's there and that's the message that the whole house is blasting at you and if you happen to live there then you're going to be sick and what you're going to be sick from is too much order and in the other house you're going to be sick from too much chaos and so when you interact with a house the unexplored parts are the chaos that have that parts that you have not yet contended with are the chaos that has not yet been transformed by your embodied logos action into habitable territory and it does not belong to you arise walk through the land in the length of it and the breadth of it for I will give it unto thee the neighbor him removed his tent and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre which is in Hebron and built there an altar unto the Lord and it came to pass in the days of amraphel king of shinar arioch king of ellasar chair de L'Amour there's a lot of kings we won't talk about them he's made war with barrett king of sodom and with Persia king of gomorrah she and ab king of admah and the king of bela wishes or and these were joined together in the Vale of Siddim which is the salt sea hmm now this is actually very much relevant because you see the Vale of Siddim which is the salt sea is the farthest south you can go if South is down because it's the Dead Sea and the Dead Sea is the lowest place that there is so what's happened is that there's chaos in the lowest place that there is that's what this story says and what happens to lawd is he gets tangled up in the chaos of the lowest place that there is and in the fourteenth year came Chidori l'amour and the kings that were with him and smote the ref Eames and Ashtaroth her name and the Susan's and ham and the Emmons and shava Korea Korea Thames and the horites in their mount sire unto Alperin which is by the wilderness and they returned and came to end mishpat which is Kadesh and smote all the country the Amalekites Amalekites and the amorite that dwelt in has a cup houses Zonta my hey hey hazards on tomorrow there we go perhaps and there went out the king of sodom and the king of gomorrah and the king of admah and the king of the bulla and the king of bela the same is zoar and they joined battle with them in the Vale of Siddim so this is absolute chaos and mayhem in the lowest place it's hell essentially with cheddar loam or the king of the lamb and with tidal king of nations and amraphel king of shinar arioch king of ellasar four kings with five and the Vale of Siddim was full of slime pits low in hell like with war isn't enough they had to throw the slime pits in there apparently around the Dead Sea there are pits of bitumen like the like the tar pits in near LA and so that this seems to actually be historically accurate and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled and fell there and then that remain fled to the mountain and they took their Goods and they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their victuals and went their way and they took lot Abrams brothers son who dwelt and sought him and his Goods and departed so Abram has a family member who falls into the lowest place and there came one that had escaped and told Abram the Hebrew for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite brother of his skull and brother of a nur and these were confederate with abram and the neighbor him heard that his brother was taken captive he armed his trained servants born in his own house 318 and pursued them unto down well so now we also know that Abraham's a pretty brave guy right he gets word that this horrible war has broken out in the worst of all possible places and that his nephew is involved and the first thing he does is you know mount up his posse and get the hell in there and rescue his nephew so Abraham's oh whatever goodness is from the Old Testament perspective it isn't harmlessness right it isn't emasculation and castration it's not that it's not weakness it's not the inability to fight none of that is associated with virtue it's a sort of strength that enables someone to mount an armed team of 300 people when he finds out that his nephew is being kidnapped in a terrible war and to get the hell out there and take them back and so that's it that's a that's a that's a call to - it's a call to power that not know a kind of peaceful meekness that's funny too because you know there's a line in the New Testament the meek shall inherit the earth I got a look at my phone for a sec here I don't know what time it is there's a line in the New Testament that says and send the Sermon on the Mount says the meek shall inherit the earth and that I read that line always bothered me I thought no way that's not that that's not right meat can't be the right word so when I was doing this story of Noah and talking about the Sermon on the Mount I spent a bunch of time looking at commentaries on that line looking at the roots you know the Greek roots and the Hebrew roots and trying to figure out what that meant and in meat does not mean meat that's wrong here's what it means those who have weapons and know how to use them but still keep the machine will inherit the earth Jesus that's a lot different man it's a lot better right because the way it's normally it's normally interpreted is if you're so weak that you're harmless then things will go well for you it's like no that's not right that's and that's not that can't be right it doesn't fit with the narrative it certainly doesn't fit with this narrative and he divided himself against them he and his servants by night and smote them and pursued them unto Hoba which is on the left side of Damascus and he brought back all the goods and his brother lot and his Goods and the women also and the people did work Abraham and the kings of Sodom went out to meet him after his return at the slaughter of charrid Aloma and of the kings that there were there with him at the valley of shaveh which is the Kings Dale and Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine and he was the priest of the Most High God and He blessed him and said blessed be Abram of the Most High God possessor of heaven and earth and blessed be the Most High God which had delivered thine enemies into thine hand and gave him tithes of all and the king of Sodom said to Abram give me the persons and take thy goods to thyself this is that that were the goods that Abram that they'd been rescued of the Kings and Abram said to the king of Sodom I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord what does that mean it means I've made a vow that's what it means that that's what that phrase means I've made a vow to God the possessor of heaven and earth that I will not take anything from a thread even to a shoelace I won't take anything that's yours lest you should say I've made abram rich I'll take only that which my young men Avedon and the portion of men that went with me and inner s : ma'am let them take their portion and so Abraham decides here he's made this immense sacrifice and done this incredibly brave act and rescued his nephew and rescued the king's goods and and they offer him a reward and he says I'm not going to take the reward and the reason for that is that he doesn't want to contaminate the ethical purity of his actions he doesn't want to be paid he doesn't want it he doesn't want to benefit from doing he doesn't want to avoid some what is it exactly he doesn't want to benefit inappropriately from doing the right thing it's something like that and so it's another testament to his character in a very complex Testament right because he's not a sin he's not a good man in any simple sense I mean look what's just happened he's he's mounted and armed he's mounted and armed he's he's led an army into battle and parked in and participated in the slaughter he refuses to benefit from it except to get back what was his that's it he refuses to benefit from it except to get back what was rightfully his and in that way he maintains his covenant with God even to a shul a chit I anything though never so smaller mean less thou should claim a share with God in the honor due to him this is from Matthew pool who was an English nonconformist theologian commenting on that line even to a shoe latchet ie anything though never so meaner small lest thou should claim a share with God in the honor due to him to his blessing alone I do and I will all my riches or lest thou should say Abram is enriched with my spoils and however he pretended kindness and charity yet indeed it was his covetousness that put him upon this work after these things the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision saying fear not Abram I'm nice shield and I exceedingly and I exceeding great reward a vision issue again well we went through that last week fear not Abram I am thy shield and my exceeding great reward and Abram said Lord God what can you give me seeing as I'm childless toddlers and that's the only thing that matters to a broom at this point and the steward of my house is this an easier of dem Damascus no kin and Abraham said Abram said Behold to me thou has given no seed and lo one born in my house is mine heir and behold the word of the Lord came unto him saying this shall not be thine heir but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels should be nine hair so he gets promised the impossible once again and he brought him forth abroad and said now look towards the heaven until the stars if thou be able to number them and he said unto him so shall thy seed be and he believed in the Lord and counted to him for righteousness seeing that this is a covenant idea this belief because here's the belief it's the willingness to act as if the world is constructed so that if you do the right thing the best possible outcome will occur it's a decision that's the Covenant right it's a decision about how to live in the world because the evidence can't be there before you make the decision right and so you might hedge your best you know when when Christ comes back in the book of Revelation to judge people because it comes back as a judge and virtually everyone gets cast out with the chaff and not saved with the wheat huh he says something very interesting he appears in a vision with a sword coming out of his mouth it's a horrifying vision and he divides the the he divides humanity into the Damned and the save or the dead yes the Damned and the saved he says something very interesting he says to those who were neither hot nor cold I will spew you out of my mouth and and it's a it's a disgust metaphor right and what it says is that the word punishment isn't waiting for those who committed to something and did wrong the worst punishment is reserved for those who committed to nothing and stayed on the fence and that's really something too that's really something to think about and it's also something I believe to be true because I see that stasis is utterly destructive because there's no progress all there is is movement backwards there's aging and suffering and no progress and so did not commit to anything is the worst of all transgressions to commit means to put your body and soul into something to offer your life as a sacrifice means that you're willing to make a bargain with fate and the bargain is I'm going to act as if I give it my all then the best possible thing will happen because of that and to to not see the analogy between that and the the active faith in God is to misunderstand the story completely and it has to be an act of faith because how are you going to know you can look at other people but that isn't going to do it it's at Kierkegaard was very clear about this sort of thing there's certain sorts of truths that you can only learn for yourself through experience and that's of course why Abram also has to go out alone right he has to leave this kenneth's it's an individual it's the individuation process like dying it's something that you do alone there's no way you can tell what is within your grasp let's say unless you make the ultimate sacrifice and there's no way of finding out without actually making it and so that's the sacrificial act right that's that's really active Abram being called upon to sacrifice Isaac and think about that is Abram he's been doing he's been like breaking himself into pieces trying to progress forward through starvation and tyranny and war and deceit and the potential loss of his wife and child lessness and like everything that can really befall you in some sense and finally God grants him Isaac when he's old it's impossible he gets Isaac his son and then what has got to do next is say well you know that son that you've been waiting for so for so long it's like I'd like to see just exactly what you're made of I think you should offer him up as a sacrifice and I mean it's a very barbaric story in a sense and maybe in more than just a sense but Abraham does maintain his covenant he's willing to make the sacrifice he's made willing to make this is the thing he's willing to make whatever sacrifice is necessary to keep his covenant with God intact and that's that and that's the decision well maybe it's no surprise that people don't do that and he believed in the Lord and he counted it to him for righteousness and he said unto him I am the Lord that brought thee out of ur of the Chaldees to give this land to you to inherit it and he said Lord God whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it and he said to him this is a sacrificial story again taking a heifer of three years and a goat of three years in RAM of three years in a Turtledove and a young pigeon it's fairly specific actually and he took all these and divided them and laid each piece one against another but the birds divided he not now there's a reason for that and I don't know the reason for it and when the fowls came down upon the carcasses Abram drove them away and when the Sun was going down a deep sleep fell upon Abram and lo a horror of great darkness fell upon him how did it mean he was afraid of the dark which is what I thought it meant when I first read it it isn't what it means it means that he fell into a trance or something like that and then he was enveloped by absolute horror so that's how this story begins and here's the commentary from Joseph Benson who was an English Methodist minister who lived in 1749 it was born in 1749 and when the Sun was going down about the time of the evening evening oblation the washing for he abode by them praying and waiting till toward evening a deep sleep fell upon Abram this was not a common sleep through weariness or carelessness and what a sloop is that's supposed to be sleep not a common sleep through weariness or carelessness but a divine ecstasy that being wholly taken off from things sensible he might be wholly taken up with the contemplation of things spiritual well it really makes you wonder what Abraham was up to in his campsite so he was participating in something that enabled this experience and Lola or a horror of great darkness fell upon him this was designed to strike upon the spirit of Abram and to possess him with the holy reverence holy fear prepares the soul for holy joy God humbles first and then lifts up echoes of psychedelic experience and he said unto Abram know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs and shall serve them and they shall afflict them for hundred years and also that nation whom they shall serve I will judge and afterwards shall they come out with great substance and thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace thou shalt be buried in a good old age but in the fourth generation they shall come hither again to the iniquity of the amorite is not yet full commentaries of Joseph Benson once again they shall come hither again hither to the land of Canaan wherein thou not art thou art the reason why they must not have the land of promise in possession until the fourth generation is because the iniquity of the ammonites was not yet full the righteous God has desert determined that the amorite shall not be cut off till they arrived at such a pitch of wickedness and therefore till it come to that the seed of Abraham must be kept out of possession so the interpretation of the story essentially is that Abraham's descendants will end up enslaved in Egypt for a long lengthy period of time and eventually come back to the land of Canaan and it's interesting to because this is part of Abraham's bargain with God and in this divine vision I mean he's been promised everything but it's a pretty tough bargain because you know when God is pushed or reveals himself let's say he says look you're going to get your damned descendants you know but it's not going to be it's it's it's going to be a tough journey they're going to be slain slaved for a very long time and eventually come back and you won't see it you'll be dead long before then and so it's a realistic promise in a sense and you might say well Abram is so desperate to keep the faith that he's willing to read good into what isn't good but I think I think I don't think that's the right way to look at it I think the right way to look at it is the people who wrote these stories were very realistic and they knew that even if things turned out well for you I mean we're still going to be real you know we're going to be some fantasy it's like let's say you have a family that flourishes is people are still going to die they're still going to get sick they're they're still going to have they're still going to be alive you know with all of its suffering but it'll be the but it'll be a life that's rich enough and complete enough so that it'll justify its its nature essentially and so and it came to pass that when the Sun went down and it was dark behold a smoking furnace and a burning lamp that passed between the pieces Albert Barnes American theologian commented on this the oven of smoke and lamp of flame symbolized the smoke of destruction in the light of salvation they're passing passing through the pieces of the sacrificial victims and probably consuming them as an accepted sacrifice or the ratification of the Covenant on the part of God as the dividing and presenting of them were on the part of Abram in the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram saying unto thy seed I haven't given this land from the river of Egypt unto the great river the river Euphrates the key nights and the Kehna sites and the Cadman nights etc now Sarai Abrams wife bear him no children and she had a handmaid wait a second I think we'll stop there I'm tiring out and it's just at its 929 so that's a very good place to stop so yes so so I should I should close properly and just sum up so what happens here is that that Abram enters into a covenant with God to act in the world and the action is an adventure story essentially and the adventures repeat and they're and they're punctuated by success and sacrifice and re contemplation right and so it's this it's this journey it's the it's the hero's journey uphill I'm here there's a crisis I collapse i reconstruct myself to a higher place and life is like that continually and that's the story of Abram and that's all contained though it's all contained and this is the thing that's so cool because that is what your life is going to be like whether you plan out your life or not it's going to be punctuated like that maybe it won't go up maybe it'll go down the question is what sort of container of you need to be in in order to tolerate movement up and down and that's what the story of Abraham provides it provides a it provides a description of the Covenant that's like the Ark the Covenant in the Ark are the same thing right except the Covenant is the psychological equivalent of the ark and the Covenant is have faith in the structure of existence and go forth that's the Covenant and that and the story is that's the best possible solution that you have at hand all right so I'm going to make a request with regards to the questions which may mean you have to reorient yourself in the line I would like the first two questions on each side if possible to relate specifically to tonight's lecture and then I can and then I can address more general issues if that's if that's okay so and I again I would like you to carefully speak into the mic so that the people who are watching can hear can you hear me yeah I can I the story about Abraham as saying his wife was his sister you referred to that as him making a mistake I'm not quite sure I understand how you're reading that as a mistake seeing as it was a very deliberate decision and it had a pretty good outcome for him and he does the same thing a few chapters later yes this is true you see I don't I don't I don't feel that I have cracked that part of that story properly now the reason I said it was a mistake is because it's clearly an act of deceit and in it and it does put the Pharaoh in a very awkward position not to mention sir I by the way are sir how do you say that I don't know how to say that sir i sir i it's awry to begin with yes is that right sir I yes okay and then it's Sarah and that so Abram means High King something like that and Abraham means father of the people and Sarai means princess and Sarah means mother of the people it's something I have it exactly right I'll tell you next week but that's part of the name transformation the the it seems to me that at least in part it's an indication of Abraham's willingness to use a suboptimal solution when driven to it by necessity I don't think it's a heroic act to pretend that your wife is your sister now you know and and and maybe you might say well under the circumstances there was nothing else he could have done but it does seem it I can't see how you can interpret it other than as a departure from the truth but I know that that's not all there is to it and it does seem to work out well for him and my interpretation is that well if you're oriented properly in the world the grace of God allows you a few necessary mistake something like that you have an alternative idea well why not what what is it about that that because it's Abraham and it isn't reasonable to attribute mistakes to him or what is it because at least I think it says in the text that he's looking to get out of a bad situation and he does whatever is the best thing that's available to him and not to mention as I said he does the same trick a few chapters later yeah well maybe maybe it is the case that you know it's like a white lie issue you know you say well it's a white lie acceptable I would say well the best that you can come up with is acceptable that that doesn't mean it's it's optimal though right like I I'll give you a foolish example because it's the best that I could do at the moment but you know if you if you have a loved one who says does this dress make me look fat the answer to that question is I don't answer questions like that that's the answer right because the other answer is the white lie I mean at least in this context and that means that on the one hand you're maintaining the positive contract between you and the person who's asking the question but then you're still sacrificing the truth within that so your your you're maintaining your relationship with the higher order truth but sacrificing a lower order truth and that would be better than the reverse but it's not as good as not sacrificing the truth at all and I would say that if you're maybe fortunate because sometimes it's a matter because you can be in a situation where all your choices are bad I've seen people in situations like that I've probably been in situations like that and maybe that is what's happening in that stories every choice Abraham is in front of him is bad but I can't help but think that it's more than that it means that if you're doing the best you can and it's not perfect it can still be good enough that's how it looks to me thank you hello dr. Peterson you mentioned earlier there's been a pervasive problem of nihilism and moral relativism and that that kind of be cured with a nice naive optimism that's grounded in fact and what can actually be done to improve situations is there a way to communicate that message to a younger audience say teenagers in a high school environment which is nowadays a hotbed for this kind of nihilistic morally relativist thinking great I'm glad you asked that so I'm going to tell you I was thinking about saying this at the beginning but I decided not to but now I get to say it because I got this question so that's so cool um I I have plans and so his plan number one I have worked with some people to design a website that will enable high university students to enter their course descriptions their professors name the sub discipline and the university and an artificial intelligence agent will tell them if the course is postmodern neo-marxist indoctrination not not only and I have made tentative arrangements with someone to finance a advertising campaign for that site and so the goal is well to inform the consumer do you want to be educated or do you want to be indoctrinated and happily you'll be able to use the site equally for both purposes right because if you want to if you want to take the the the courses that I would regard as into oxidation then this will give you a way of ensuring that nothing that you get exposed to won't be of that sort so and then I'm going to make a video to introduce that to university students and their parents and I'm going to outline what I think the universities are doing wrong is about 20 things they're doing wrong and and there's seriously wrong things and I'm going to start by describing the utility of a university education in humanities education because the humanities education makes you into the kind of autonomous individual that can go away from that can be independent and can communicate and think and that has immense economic value not not just spiritual value and cultural value but economic value and so there's I don't want to tell people not to go to university I want to tell them to go to university and grow the hell up and and learn to communicate and think and I want them to avoid the people who will take the spirit away from them and so that's what that website is going to do I hope and the goal is to drop the enrollment in the indoctrination courses across the english-speaking world by 75% within five years that's the goal so and then you ask that you ask more specifically about high school students well we have this future authoring program that has been used for university students and it produces about a 30% improvement in retention and we've tested several thousand University students anyone can use it by the way it's not for university students but it was easy for us to test it's beneficial impact even if people only spend under 90 minutes on it it still has approximately that effect especially on young men especially if they're ethnic minorities especially if they're not oriented towards a career and didn't do very well in school and so that's really cool because it's really hard to design a psychological intervention that helps the people who are doing the worst most psychological interventions so imagine there are people who are doing not so well and people who are doing well and you produce a psychological intervention what usually happens is the people who are doing well benefit even more right but this seems to work for the disenfranchised so we're thrilled about that really and so we produced a version for high school students yes and so but we don't have them look three to five years out into the future because they can't and they don't know enough you know it's hard for fully mature adults to look that far into the future high school kids can probably manage three to six months and so we're going to have them concentrate on character development and and what they want for their from their friendships and how they would like to orient themselves in school and to start thinking about the sorts of person that they would like to be and that never happens in schools weirdly enough there's a guy named John Gatto who won the Teacher of the Year award in New York City and then in New York State and then stopped being a teacher by the way he wrote a series of books about the education system that explained why students in pre-university education aren't taught to be autonomous individuals it's very interesting what he's discovered historically but anyways we're going to market that probably to parents and to university students themselves rather than to the schools because our experience has been that producing this sort of material directly for individuals works much better it's much more efficient and so then students will be able to or their parents will be able to purchase the program and the students will be able to use it to design their own personality in a manner that would make them thrilled to be alive let's say that would be the goal right yes I'm gonna get you to turn it to put it down a little more heed excellent perfect yes yes yeah and I think I specially the literature in developmental psychology I think bears this out but I think a huge part of learning is interaction and discourse and that seems very difficult in an online setting even if it's through text I don't I don't quite see it it's the same thing and additionally I think there's a huge motivational factor that's difficult to arm it's difficult to keep motivated when you're isolated and nobody else around you is pursuing the same goal so how would you dress though you're absolutely right on both counts um I would say that the idea of an online humanities university is grandiose and it may not be possible and the reason for that is that and as you're alluding to we actually don't understand what the university is we think it's lectures and exams but it's probably not it's certainly being together with people of your own age as you start your life it's moving away from your household it's establishing yourself as a credible intellect right it's it's picking a new group of peers it's all of those things and it isn't clear how that can be replicated online now the people that I'm talking to are sophisticated enough to understand Marshall McLuhan's dictum that the medium is the message and so I think it would be a mistake to attempt to duplicate the University online because you can't but so what we're concentrating on right now is not so much content but infrastructure the question is we want to set up an educated education online that will be autonomously self-governing and self-improving and the content in some sense were not so much interested in the Khan and as we are interested in the process by which people who generate good content might be optimally rewarded and that's what we want to get right and that's probably a discussion that'll take a year or two years to to flesh out we started to conceptualize what the system might look like but but to your point it isn't we're not taking lectures and putting them online although obviously that's what I'm doing that that isn't going to make an online humanities University and we know that I think everything you said is exactly is it's very accurate and also indicative of the high probability that something like this would sail so but well you know where we're going to try to be aware of the pitfalls we're also going to I read this great book I would recommend this book it's a very funny book by a guy named John gall it's called system antics and it's a cult classic systematics and it's about how systems really work and how they fail and it's a work of ironic comedy but it's quite brilliant and one of the things when one line he needs it's made of a bunch of axioms and here's one axiom I just love this is the system does not do what its name says it does and so one guy worked in Alberta Social Services when I was a kid about eighteen or so and I worked as a consultant and I one of the and I got involved in projects that were above my pay grade I would say and I learned a lot about how how large bureaucracies functioned and I was asked at one point to update a report that had been made the year before about what percentage of the spending of the Social Services Department actually went to the recipients of welfare and and social aid in general and the answer was the system did not know and could not find out and they had hired a very expensive consulting firm to answer that question the year before and I was asked to update it which was quite odd to begin with but then I did I went and looked at the consulting report and I went into the data and what I found was that none of it was real but even more importantly there was no way of knowing whether it was true or false because the system had never been set up to calculate what percentage of its total spending actually went to the recipients of social aid it just blew me away and then I thought and I was reading this book at the same time and I thought oh the purpose of the social services department is to employ people in the social services department and I mean I wasn't being cynical about that it's like charity most charities you know it's like 90% overhead so what is the charity do it runs itself now you don't want to be cynical about that because big businesses are the same most like even if they're running at a profit the profit is like five percent so the business spends 95% of its time maintaining itself you know and it makes a bit of product and it makes a bit of profit but most of what it does is maintain itself so anyways one of the axioms in that book that was one of them is the system does not do what it says it does so that's then you can face the system with a clear head and say okay well this thing isn't doing what it says it's doing but it's probably doing something and the thing it's doing might be useful but we should figure out what that thing is so that's been really useful to me as a guide to thinking the other thing he said was if you want to build a big system that works start with by building a small system that works and scale it and we've done that for example with the self authoring programs you know has built small scale systems that are very robust with the hope that they'll scale and that's the same we'll do the same thing here is start with a small amount of content see if we can reward see what I would like to have happen is you know there's a lot of people out there who are pretty intensely educated and some of them are really creative and so imagine that there's a timeline imagine you could do a humanity since you imagine there's a timeline say of a thousand years but scalable then imagine that that there would be lectures associated with the timeline at different levels of resolution so we might call for a lecture on the 3rd century AD what happened in the 3rd century ad you've got half an hour to explain it you can explain it any way you want you can use animation you can use lecture you can use text you can make a movie we don't care what you have to do is that's the topic that's the timespan that's the amount of time and then you can post it and so we could generate content that way and let people experiment and then we can have people review the content as part of their generate questions about the content as part of their assignments rate the questions as part of their assignments and rate the content and then if we charge people imagine you had to pay $50 a month to enroll something like that maybe we would allow you when you first enroll maybe you get to use five dollars of it as disposable income you can reward that to any creator you want but as you progress through the courses your right to determine where your money goes would increase as you became more and more educated hopefully that way we would get some quality control built into it so those are some of the ideas that were that we're starting to play around with so the only one I'm consider about is the motivation yeah what's that the motivation issue for individuals well then I'm not going to go into that because it would take too long but but rest assured that we are thinking about that very hard as well we're going to build competition into it we're going to build cooperation into it we hope to build peer into relationships into it I think all that's possible but but complex right because it's we don't know how to build an online education system really and but it would be fun to experiment and see if we can figure out how to do it so thank you hi so I I couldn't really zero in on any particular question so it's more of a family questions that I have about the nature and cultivation of conscience which was in a sense what this story exemplified about Abraham why do you say that why do you think that the story exemplified the development of conscience of conscience specifically well going back to the zigzag yeah right and the star how you have to keep okay so that's what you were referring to okay orienting yourself completely autonomously yeah on your own terms right yeah okay okay so you we hit on some great there I think you know and this is something weirdly enough that I learned most particularly from the Pinocchio movie which I spent a lot of time studying is because in in the Pinocchio movie Jiminy Cricket is an avatar of Christ essentially but it's very because he's a bug that's the first thing that's kind of weird and because Jiminy Cricket is southern US slang for Jesus Christ among other things but and these things get aggregated in in great mythic dramas like that and that's a great mythic drama but you know one of the things that really makes Jiminy Cricket different from Christ apart from the fact that Christ wasn't a cricket is that Craig the cricket learns as he progresses right even though he's the conscience and so you'd think that he would be the infallible guide that isn't how the moviemakers set it up but not so cool is that he is just as muddle-headed as Pinocchio at the beginning and he's a bit arrogant and puffed up too and so it took me a long time to think that through and then I realized that well you you have the voice of you have the voice of culture in you you have the voice of culture within you but it's old and dead and out-of-date and it's not fully articulated and updated and then what happens is that if you enter into a dialogue with it and you hammer yourself against the world then you get hammered into shape and so does your conscience and so you both become elevated and so well so anyways I think that's that's ridiculously cool because it means that your conscience you don't have an infallible guide but you have something within you that you could build into an infallible guide if you cooperated with it and and said it so well so I think that's very interesting so that being said yes the picture that I have in my mind of the cultivation of virtue in general it's kind of like taking a block of wood and trying to carve out a sphere out of it it'll never be perfectly round but the more you carve right the rounder and rounder right that's successive approximation yeah well one of it's also like what do you call that compound interest this is one of the things that's also and I think this puts you on the to those who more shall be given part of the curve it's like you know you don't have to improve yourself very much each week to really improve yourself on the ridiculous amount in a year you know so you could make you could you could you could Wow make your day 1/100 of a percent better than the day before not would do the trick if you were if you were constant about that that would do the trick so that that's this successive approximation is you don't want to underestimate the utility of incremental progress man it's really kids deadly powerful so so let's say you get to the you know the higher ends of the curve right you're like a pretty virtuous person let's say you even become a sage or something of the sort and I mean one should you doubt your conscience like what are things that we should watch out for even when we got great well that's yep okay um just just to get it out of the way right yeah I don't know how much this relates well it does relate but Psychopaths for example the entire idea that they lack a conscience and that's why right that's what psychopathy is whether or not you agree with that definition right but there's an issue of conscience again a play with psychopathy how can we the first question doubt ourselves in a way that's warranted right regardless of how virtuous we've become and can you treat a psychopath could they call fate a conscience okay so let we'll start with the first one part of the reason that that I believe that freedom of speech is the canonical right let's end obligation right more importantly even obligation is that that's how you figure out if you're wrong you know because so I said home and I think and I think and I think let's say but I'm like who am I to think there's so many things I don't know that it's it's just there's the what I know compared to what I don't know is so miniscule that it's a preposterous act just to say something okay so so no matter how much I sit at home and think I'm not going to fix that I'm going to be flat and then I have biases but my temperament and I have biases because of my malevolence and I have biases because of my my gender my sex let's say since we're not so fond of that word so Eva no matter how much I said home and think I'm still going to be wrong and malevolent so then what do I have to do is I have to talk to some other people and I have to say this is what I think and it's going to be ugly you know because what the hell do I know but then if I listen people will tell me why I'm wrong and lots of people have been telling me why I'm wrong like a lot and it's hard you know it's hard but it's but I've learned something from it like I had this revelation let's say about being yelled at by your father now I know that you can be yelled at too much by your father but it's like you're wrong man and so someone's yelling at you and maybe they're only ten percent right but if you shut the hell up and listen then you can figure out where you're wrong and then maybe you can be thankful for that and then maybe if you shut up and listen your father would quit yelling at you you know because he's wrong - what the hell does he know he knows how to yell at you and tell you how you're wrong and he's throwing things out you add you that are probably not true but some of its true and you know if someone can tell you why you're wrong they've given you a great gift because then you don't have to be wrong anymore and you might think well who cares if you're wrong but you know there's a line in the New Testament - is if the blind lead the blind won't they fall in won't they fall into a ditch the answer to that question by the way is yes they will and so the reason that you want to think is because thinking is how you like when you think you creative the fictional world that's an analog of the world and then you make an avatar of yourself to act in that world and then if the Avatar dies you don't act out those actions right well so if you think properly then you don't have to suffer and die and so if you can say what you think and people can tell you why you're wrong and you know to say what you think under extreme circumstances means that you're going to say things that no one wants to hear because those are the things you don't know about those are the things that are conflictual and differ called it are going to be hard conversations man and you're going to be wrong about them a lot if you don't get to stumble forward with your stupidity then you can't be corrected and so so there's no distinction between free speech and thinking and there's no distinction between thinking and thriving and so those who want to inhibit free speech do not wish for people to thrive and I believe that so thinking does not happen inside your head that's only the beginnings of thinking and it's this that we're doing here that's thinking you know so we have to protect that psychopath I don't I say this I hope non naively also having dealt with Psychopaths in my clinical practice and I would say now and then in my life I don't believe in Psychopaths I don't believe that we know enough to say there are people born without conscience um I don't think the psychometric measurement of psychopathy is everything that it should be I've been trying to model it bei in the Big Five domain I think now it's complicated because so I would say a psychopath the classic psychopath is likely extroverted especially assertive disagreeable and unconscious and maybe extremely low in neuroticism so you can't frighten them but so that's a rare combination because it's extreme on many traits right but that I don't believe that that means that someone with that personality configuration is doomed from birth to a pathological existence because there's things about psychopathy that that the that the classifiers those who claim like correctly that the psychopath is born in some sense can't explain it's like well what about the cruelty there seems to be a motive they're you know they're passionless and they lack no they lack emotion well why are they cruel then for entertainment well but then you have to explain the entertainment motivation like there's a failure in some sense with the classic psychopathy theorist to come to grips with the problem malevolence it skirted over and you can't do that if you're talking about psychopathy it's like malevolence is the bloody issue here and so the other issue with the psychopaths is that he's irredeemable right that's the idea I don't think we know enough to make such claims now and that doesn't I know the psych office a literature quite well and I have great respect for their primary research is in the field I want to make that perfectly clear but we're talking at a different we're talking we're approaching the problem from a different level of analysis here something like a spiritual level of analysis and I don't think that there's an easy easy translation from the descriptive psychometric psychiatric approach to the spiritual level they don't match and I'm more likely to say let's not assume the soul is doomed from birth right and I'm loathe to think that there are people born irredeemable although I do think there are irredeemable people know the death penalty issues interesting in that regard you know because I've read a lot about really terrible people and I've also read a lot about what really terrible people said about themselves and many of them wished for the death penalty and so it's absolutely clear that there are things that you can do that deserve the death penalty but that doesn't mean that the state should have the right to impose it that's a different question so yep in the previous lecture you mentioned the 2008 economic crisis and one of the very interesting themes that's emerged at many levels be at universities or economic policies this perceived culture war specifically the idea of Marx versus milk and you've criticized postmodern the neo-marxist thought very frequently one interesting critic of the policies of the EU specifically EC ECB and IMF during the Greek debt crisis was Yanis varoufakis the former greek Finance Minister and his criticism of MIL was deal was Mills alleged contempt for the population and verify his comments on the type of capitalism that results in too big to fail he describes themselves as an erratic Marxist to me personally is an example of someone whose position on the philosophical mooring of policy is interesting to compare and contrast with yours he certainly not your typical Marxist or post modernist even though not really sure what that means but if you look at his work during the Greek debt crisis and his current work with diem25 he seems to be well reasoned well-positioned and and articulate now I wanted to know if you had an opinion on that type of criticism of MIL or his taking of a position as a neurotic Marxist okay I would say I would say no to the specifics of the question I don't think that I have that detailed expertise in order to answer the question at the level of analysis that you where you formulated it but I have something to say that's more general about the set of phenomena that you described there's no doubt that distribution is a major problem that capitalism contends with imperfectly at best and the distribution problem is the pre de distribution problem right and it's something that Marx commented on which mostly in the monetary sphere is that money tends to accumulate in the hands of very few people it's like there's no doubt about that now as we've discussed before the people in whom hands the money accumulates do turnover more than people say think especially in in countries that are functioning me reasonably well and it's really important that that happens yes yes yes but that doesn't that doesn't solve the problem of the fact that produced goods gravitate towards an extreme minority now they're also produced often by extreme minority which is also a problem I would say then that the idea that capitalism is more prone to that distribution problem than any other system I don't believe that to have been demonstrated at all and I think that capitalism is actually pretty good at self-destruction except when that's interfered with and I think that's particularly the case in the United States where generally the policy has been if you're an idle with feet of clay no matter how big you are you get to fail now that's being compromised severely in the last 20 years and we're probably going to pay for that I think they really paid for that in Japan right where there is every attempt to prop out that the gods that should have died so so fair enough for the critique of capitalism that's not the issue the issue is do you have a better idea and if the idea is well we could kind of do it marks suggested then you don't get to have that position and claim what should I say I haven't seen any evidence that systems predicated on that set of actions have done anything but more harm than good thank you yeah and when will you be announcing the monthly extension to the circuses as soon as I find out whether or not I can rent this theater in the fall yeah thank you we'll see you next week you<template as="cueGroup" is="dom-repeat" class="style-scope ytd-transcript-body-renderer"></template></ytd-transcript-body-renderer><ytd-transcript-body-renderer class="style-scope ytd-transcript-renderer"> so I've been thinking this week about doing this one from once a month on a continuing basis so so I think if I do that I think it'll be here although it's harder to rent this theater during the academic year but if it isn't here it'll be somewhere else and because I'd like to continue doing this I'm learning a lot from doing it and and once a month would really be good because then I could really do the background work and and I could probably do that for a couple of years because obviously this is going very quickly but that's okay you know I mean it shouldn't go any faster than it can go and that's how it that's how it seems to me anyways so this has been this has been a very steep learning curve for me with regards to these stories because I didn't understand them very well and I got better at using the resources on line to help me do my background investigation I have a lot of books and some of you may have noticed that online I posted a conversation I had with Jonathan Powell and his and his brother Matthew I hope it's Matthew ivory names escape me so badly but I believe that's right he just finished a book on them on the Bible and so I've been doing a lot of thinking and talking about these stories trying to understand what they're about and and then there's all these commentaries there's a great site I think it's called Bible hub that has every single verse of the Bible is listed there and then with each verse there are like they've aggregated ten commentaries from about ten commentaries from over the last four hundred years and so there's like a dense page on every line and that's one of the things that's really interesting about this book too is that it's it's aggregated so much commentary that it's that it's it's much bigger than looks the book is much bigger than it looks and so it's been very interesting to become familiar with those two and the fact that this site is set up with all the commentaries split up by verses means you can rapidly compare the commentaries and get a sense of you know how people have interpreted this over while at least several hundred years but of course much longer than that because the people who wrote the commentaries were of course reading things that were older than that so that's been very very interesting so last week we talked about a couple of things we talked about how you might understand the idea of the divine encounter and then we also paralleled that with the idea that God disappears in the Old Testament he he boughs out as the stories progress and that seems to be a an emergent property of the sequencing of the stories right because all the books were written by independent people different people and then they were aggregated by other people and so the narrative continuity is some kind of emergent property that's it's a consequence of this interaction between people readers and writers over centuries and it's it's strange that given that there are also multiple coherent narratives that United you know it's really it's really not that easy to understand that but it does at least seem to be the case and so and the third thing we talked about was that as God bows out so to speak the the the individual personality seems of the characters that are involved the human characters that are involved seems to become more and more developed and it isn't exactly clear what that I mean what it means is that God steps away and man steps forward that's what it means but why it's arranged like that or they or they say ultimate significance of that is by no means clear and so so Abraham who we're going to concentrate on today is quite a well-developed character and I would say there are two there multiple endings and beginnings in the biblical stories the most important ending I suppose is the ending of the the garden of paradise and and the disenchantment of the world and the sending forth of Adam and Eve into history right into the future into into a mode of being that has a future as part of it and that has history as part of it and that has the necessity of sacrifice and toil as part of it that's obviously crucial and then that's that is replayed with the story of Noah because everything is destroyed and then the world is created anew and then sacrifices have to be made in order for the world to begin and then you see the same thing happen again after the Noah story in the Tower of Babel because history as we really understand history seems to start with Abraham because the stories of Abraham sound like historical stories and no scholars debate about the historical accuracy of the Bible and I suppose there's no way of ever determining once and for all the degree to which you might regard the accounts as equivalent to modern empirical history but this is a psychological interpretation of the biblical stories not a historical interpretation and it certainly does seem to be the case that from a psychological perspective we enter something like the domain of the modern conceptualization relatively modern conceptualization of history with Abraham beyond the accounts of divine commands that Abraham carries out this is from Freedman man I mentioned in the last lecture who wrote the disappearance of God a variety of other books that are well worth reading the narrative also includes a variety of stories in which Abraham acts on his own initiative he divides land with his nephew lot he battles Kings he takes concubines he argues with his wife Sarah on two occasion he tells Kings that Sarah is his sister out of fear that they will kill him to get his wife he arranges his sons marriage in the place of the single story of Noah's drunkenness there are in the case of Abraham the stories of a man's life and one of the things I was really struck by reading this in depth and read the commentary is how much like a story about a person it is you know Abraham isn't a divine figure in any in any archetypal sense precisely when he has archetypal elements because he's also obviously the founder of a nation but fundamentally he's a human being and and he makes he has the adventures and he makes the mistakes of a human being and that's it's the mistake part that really struck me you know because it did I was talking with a friend of mine this week Norman Doidge who's a very remarkable person in many ways and he was taking me to task he was reading my book which I'm going to publish sure which will be out in January and in in the book I in one section I contrasted the God of the Old Testament with the god of the New Testament and made the case sort of based on north of Freud's ideas that the God of the Old Testament was really harsh and judgmental you know and that the god of the New Testament was more merciful and you know at least to some degree more sweetness and light and Norman took me to task about that saying that that was a overly Christianized interpretation which would make sense because I derived it in part from Northrop Frye and I really have come to understand that more that he's right because that he's right about that because the God in the Old Testament is actually far more merciful than he's generally made out to be and you really see this with it's good news fundamentally if you regard the representation of God as somehow key to the description of being itself I mean Abraham makes a lot of mistakes you know serious mistakes and and yet he has a life and he's and he's blessed by God despite the fact that he's pretty deeply flawed and engages in deceptive practice I mean he's a good man but he's not a perfect man by any stretch of the imagination and and things work out really well for him and he's the founder of the nation and all of that and that's good news for everyone because perfect people are very very hard to find and if the only pathway to having a rich and meaningful life was through perfection then we would all be in deep trouble and so that that's very satisfying to read that and the other the other thing that I've been struck by is that you know Abraham and I think this is actually absolutely key to the interpretation of the story Abraham goes out and does things that's the thing and so one of the things that I've noticed in my life is that nothing I've ever done was wasted and by done I mean put my heart and soul into you know like like attempted with with all of my effort that always worked now it didn't always work the way I expected it to work that's a whole different issue but the payoff from it was always positive I always something always a something of value always accrued to me when I made the sacrifices necessary to do something worthwhile and so I think part of the message in in this in the story of a and the Abrahamic stories is go do something and and I thought about this in a variety of ways outside of the interpretation of this story because I have this program some of you might be familiar with which is called future authoring program and it's it's designed to help people make a plan for three to five years into the future you know and we so what you do is you you answer some questions it's a writing program you know answer some questions about how you would like your life to be what you would like your character to be three to five years down the road if you were taking care of yourself like you were taking care of someone that you actually cared about so you kind of have to split yourself into two people and treat yourself like you like someone you have respect for and that you want the best for now it's not easy because people don't necessarily have respect for themselves and they don't necessarily want what's the best for themselves because they have a lot of self contempt and a lot of self hatred a lot of guilt and a lot of existential angst and and a lot of self-consciousness and all of that and and so people don't necessarily take care of themselves very well and and I think it's I think it's I think you have an obligation it's one of the highest moral obligations to treat yourself as if you're a creature of value and and that is in some sense it's in some sense that's independent of your actions and you might think about that metaphorically as a recognition of your divine worth in the biblical sense regardless of your of your sins so to speak and I think that's that's that's powerful language as far as I'm concerned once you understand it anyways with the self authoring program the future authoring program you you ask you answer questions about what what how you would like your friendships to be conducted because it's useful to surround yourself with people who are trying to move forward and more importantly who are happy when you move forward and not happy when you move back backwards not when you fall that isn't what I mean but when you're doing self-destructive things your friends shouldn't be there to cheer you on and because then they're really not acting like friends obviously you know I know it's obvious but it still happens all the time and people allow it to happen it's not a good idea and you know how would you like to sort your family out and I was thinking about this this week too because I was thinking about Noah's Ark and there was a phrase in that story that I didn't understand which was that Noah was perfect in his generations I don't know what that means you know when you're when you're going through a book like the Bible if you don't understand the phrase that actually means you've missed something it doesn't mean that that's just not you know that's not germane to the story it means you're stupid you didn't get it man you didn't get it you didn't standard and so the idea that Noah was perfect in his generations and that's why he could build an ark that would sustain him and him and and humanity itself through the flood it meant that he not only did he walk with God which is something that we talked about in the context of the Sermon on the Mount but he established proper relationships with his family with his children and so what that meant was that his not only was he well integrated as a person but his level of integration had reached the point where it stretched out beyond him and encompassed his family and so it was Noah and the family that was in the ark and I can tell you and I really understood this this year because I had a very tumultuous year you could think about it from a personal perspective I could think about it as a year that had no shortage of floods and might and part of the reason that I was able to get through it I also had terrible health problems and one of the reasons I was able to get through it was because my family really came together around me my kids my wife my parents and my friends as well and particularly a certain group of friends and that's partly all of that came together in my mind that's we can I thought well that's what it means to be perfect in his generations meant that he hadn't just straightened himself out he'd also straightened out his relationships with his family and I can tell you that when crisis strikes you which it will it will the flood will come right that's why the apocalypse is always upon us the flood will definitely come in your life and to the degree that you've organized yourself psychologically and also healed the relationships between you and your family that could be the critical element that that determines whether you live or die when a crisis comes or or whether someone in your family lives or dies and so the idea of the Ark containing the man who's who walks with God and who's generations are perfect and that that's what sustains humanity through the crisis it's like you couldn't be more psychologically accurate than that no the other thing I was thinking about this weekend I was thinking about another line in the New Testament I think it's from the Sermon on the Mount but I'm not absolutely sure Christ compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a mustard seed and so I was thinking about a mustard seed as a very tiny seed and it grows into a spectacular complex plant and I was thinking about how you should operate in the world in order to make it a better place assuming that that's what you should be doing and that is what you should be doing and there's lots in the world to fix everything that bothers you about the world and about yourself should be fixed and you can do that and my dawning realization I have a friend he is in Montreal his name is James Simon he's a great painter and he's taught me a lot of things helped he's helped me design my house and beautify it and I bought some paintings from him a couple of years ago and he did this series of paintings where he went around North America and and stood in different places and then he painted the view from here down and so it's his feet planted in different places on roads in the desert on the ocean I have one actually hanging over my toilet which is him standing at a urinal yeah well you know he was trying to make a point and the point was that wherever you are it's worth paying attention and that's because you know so all these places that he visited he looked exactly where he was from standing by the side of the road in the desert sort of mundane in some sense but then maybe he put 40 hours into that painting you know it's very very realistic painting with really good light and what he's telling you as a painter is everything is worth paying attention to an infinite amount but you don't have enough time so the artist does that for you right the artist looks and looks and looks and looks and looks and then gives you that vision and so then you can look at the painting and it reminds you that right where you are is there's every everything that there is is right where you are and that's a hard thing to realize but it's actually true and so I've been telling people online in various ways and in lectures that they should start fixing up the world by cleaning up their room and I wanted to just elaborate on that a little bit before I get back to the lecture itself so as it's becoming this internet weird internet meme you know and and and it's a joke and good it's a joke I'm really happy about the fact that so much of this has got like the leaving of humor and it's really important because that's what stops things from degenerate getting into into conflict humor and I was thinking about this idea of cleaning up your room in relationship to the mustard seed idea and you see the thing about cleaning up your room this is also something I learned from Carl Jung and his study is on alchemy because for Jung when the alchemist was attempting to make the philosopher's stone he was not only engaged in the transformation of the material world but he was engaged in the process of self transformation that occurred at the same time as the chemical Trent as the chemical transformation so the psychological work in some sense let's say you want to sort out your room and beautify it because the beauty is also important and let's say that all you have is just a little room like you're not rich you're poor and you don't have any power that's another thing but you've got your damn room and you've got this space right in front of you you know that that's a part of the cosmos that you can come to grips with and you might think well what's there in front of you right in front of you and the answer to that is it depends on how open your eyes are that that's the proper answer because you could say and William Blake said this for example Aldous Huxley made comments that were very similar that in a transcendent state you can see infinity in the finite and you might say well you can say and you can see infinity and what you have within your grasp if you look and you could say maybe that's the case with your room and so you want to clean up your room well okay how do you do that exactly well a room is a room is a place to sleep and so if you say your room ups properly then you figure out how to sleep and when you should sleep and how you should sleep and then you figure out when you should wake up and then you figure out what clothes you should wear because they have to be arranged properly in your dresser then you have to have some place to put your clothes and you're going to have some clothes you have to figure out what you're going to wear those clothes to do right and then that means you have to figure out what you're going to do and then your room has to serve that purpose because otherwise it doesn't set up properly and if it doesn't set up if it doesn't serve your purposes you will be unhappy and not happy in the room because the way that we perceive the world is as a place to move from point A to point B in and then if the place that were in facilitates that movement then we're happy to be there and it's the place that we're in serves as an obstacle to that movement then we run happy to be there and so what it means to set up your room is that you have to have somewhere to go that's worthwhile or you can't set up your room and then your room has to be set up to facilitate that and then the next thing is well maybe you have to make it beautiful but that's not easy right that means you have to have some taste and that doesn't mean you have to have money it doesn't because you can be garish with money and you can be tasteful with nothing all you need is taste and taste beats money when it comes to beautifying things you know I mean not that money is trivial because it's not the taste is crucial and people who are very artistically oriented can make beautiful things out of virtually nothing and not only that the literature suggests that if you're going to make beautiful things putting real constraints on on what you allow yourself to do facilitates creativity instead of interfering with it because let's say you have to make something out of nothing right which I suppose would be a godly act right you have to make something out of nothing it you have to be creative in order to do that and so then to beautify your room means that you also have to develop your capacity to be creative and so then you can make your room shines but then what will happen is that if your family isn't together they will interfere with that you'll interfere with that because you won't have the discipline to do it properly but then when you start building this is this little microcosm of perfection with what you have at hand and Italy evoke all the pathologies of everyone in your household they'll wonder what the hell you're up to in there and they won't necessarily be happy because if you're if they're in a lowly place let's say and so are you and you're trying to move out of that then the higher you move out of that the more the place they're in looks bad and you might say well what they should do is celebrate your victory over chaos and evil but that isn't what will happen what will happen instead is that they will attempt to pull you back down they'll attempt to and I mean obviously all families don't do that but but all families do that to some degree and some families do almost nothing but that and so what that means is that if you're going to organize your room then you're going to have to confront the devil's in your house and that's often that's often a terrifying thing because some of those Devils have have lineages that go back many many many generations and god only knows what you have to struggle with in order to overcome that and so and so to sort your self out and to fix up your room is a non trivial matter you know and you can do that you'll learn by doing that and then maybe you'll learn enough by doing that so that you can fix up your family a little bit and then having done that you'll have enough character so that when you try to operate in the world at your job or maybe in the broader social spheres that you'll be a force for good instead of harm because you'll have learned some humility by noting just how difficult it was to put your damn room together well and yourself for that matter and so you'll proceed cautiously with your eyes open towards the good and so well those are some of the things I've been thinking about this week and they're Jermaine they're like they're germane to what we're going to discuss tonight because what happens at the beginning of the abrahamic stories is basically God comes to Abraham and just says go get going man do something do something get going and you might think well where should I go and God God is somewhat vague about that and where he sends Abraham it's a real fixer-upper man it's like there's starvation there and there's tyranny and there's and there's marital dissolution and there's deceit like it's it's just like where you live you know it's exactly the same thing it's it's it's tyranny and catastrophe so that's you know the the great the tyrannical Great Father because because Abraham ends up having to sojourn in Egypt and and there's a famine and so mother nature is on the rampage and Abraham lies about his wife as we'll see and so it's the world it's the world it's tyranny and and vulnerability and deceit and the other God says Gold because if you do go then you'll become a father of Nations and you think well again that's pretty good news although it's strange because you'd expect that if God chose Abraham then he'd send it immediately to the land of honey land of milk and honey and that isn't what happens at all it doesn't happen at all and Abraham never gets there but his mission is still regarded as divine and thank God for that because that's what your mission will be because that's what you will encounter in your life those are archetypal things everyone encounters is the tear of the social structure and and the rapaciousness of nature and the deceitful the deceitful quality of the human psyche it's like that's the world now it's a negative that's a negative view in some sense but it's positive in this story because what it basically says is something that's akin to the Sermon on the Mount which is that if you're aligned with God and you pay attention to the divine injunction then you can operate in the midst of chaos and tyranny and deception and flourish and you could hardly hope to have a better piece of news than that given that that's exactly where you are so and I didn't see any of that me Abrahamic stories to begin with so it's been very interesting to have that sort of reveal itself Baberaham section nuff develops the personality and characters of man to a new degree in biblical narrative well picturing him in a new degree of responsibility in him a new degree of responsibility so here's the other thing that's really struck me and I think this is absolutely crucial importance and I don't know how much importance but it's certainly important to me one of the things that has just blown me away in the last year because I've talked to lots of people lots of people live you know but also lots of people online but it's more obvious live and it's obvious in this theatre as well is that I've gone around and spoken and a large proportion of my audience is being young man young you know under 30 something like that and I've spoken to them a lot about responsibility and what's so odd about about this is that of all the things that I've spoken about if I can see the audience and I can feel how the audience is reacting because I'm always paying attention to all of you it's insofar as I can manage that so I get some sense of how what I'm saying is landing you know what you have to do if you're going to speak effectively to people and what what happens is if I talk about responsibilities everyone be is silent just like they are now it's silent and and not moving right focusing attentive say pick up your responsibilities pick up the heaviest thing you can and carry it and the room goes quiet and everybody's eyes open and I think whose makes me break up I was I don't I don't know why I was speaking to an English journalist today he was going to write an article in Spectator magazine I was talking about this and at the same point in the discussion the same I had the same emotional reaction I don't really understand it I think it's something something about it that's so crucial because you know we've been fed this unending diet of rights and freedoms and there's something about that especially there's something about that that's so pathologically wrong and people are starving for the antidote and antidote is truth and responsibility right and it isn't it isn't because that's what you should do and some you know and some some I know better or someone knows better for you what you should do sense it's that it's that it's that it's that that's the secret to a meaningful life and without the meaningful life and all you have is suffering and nihilism and despair and all about and self contempt and and that's not good and so the man it's necessary for men to stand up and take responsibility and they all know that and and are starving for that message and and the message is more that that's also a good thing to stand up and take responsibility because you're cursed so much now from come from from when you're young with this notion that you're active engaged with with the world is part of what is destroying and undermining the planet and adding to the tyranny of the social systems it's like how about not so much of that Hey because it's it is to soul deadening its anti human right to the car and my sense instead is that you know if you if you were able to reveal the best of yourself to you in the world that you would be an overwhelming force for good and that whatever errors might be made along the way would wash out in the works and that's the other thing that you see in the Abrahamic stories because Abraham is not a perfect person by any stretch of the imagination he's a real person and he makes mistakes but it doesn't matter the overarching narrative is you know maintain your covenant with God and despite your inadequacies then not only will you prevail but your descendants will prevail it's like great that's really good news you know so it's been really something to see that in the in the stories it's not that so that's responsibility it's not just that Abraham is kinder gentler more intrepid ethical or a better debater than his ancestor Noah rather both the Noah and Abraham stories are pieces of a development of an increasingly stronger stance of humans relative to the deity before the story is over humans will become a good deal stronger and bolder than Abraham oh that's really something to say because Abraham is pretty bold so we'll let's read the stories the first one is about Abraham Sarah and lot now these are the generations of Tara Tara begat Abram so his name is Abram to begin with and that actually turns out to be important it's not Abraham Nahor and Haran and Haran begat lot so Haran is Abraham's brother and Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his Nativity in ur of the Chaldees and Abram and Nahor took them wives the name of Abraham's wife was Sarai and the name of nahor his wife Milka the daughter of Haran the father of Milcah and the father visca but Sarai was barren she had no child and Terah took Abram his son and lot the son of Haran his son son and Sarai his daughter-in-law his son Abraham's wife and they went forth with them from the ur of Chaldees from ur of the Chaldees to go into the land of canaan that's exile and they came unto Haran and dwelt there and the days of Terah were 205 years and Terah died in Haran and there's a reason that Sarah is is introduced as barren and and it's to set the stage I think it was anton chekhov who when he was talking about the stage setting for a play that if there was a rifle hanging on the walls and it had better been used before I believe the second act or it shouldn't be hanging there at all right and so this is stage setting and I give part of the reason that the biblical writers are pointing out that Abraham's wife is barren is because it's a real catastrophe for Abraham oh and for Sarah as well that she's barren and so it's showing the trouble that Abraham's in at the beginning of the story and it's also it's also see what happens as the story progresses is that Abraham Abraham and Sarah are eventually granted the Sun but it's way late in the story and they're very very old by the time it happens and of course you're not going to be a father of Nations without having a child and so the writers are attempting to to make the case that if you forthrightly pursue that which God directs you to pursue let's say that all things are possible that's that's the idea in the narrative you know you might say that's naive and you know it's not it you think it when you're naive right and then you dispense with that idea and then when you stop being the sort of person who dispenses with ideas then you come to another place and that's the place where you think you have no idea what might be possible for you with you if you've got things together and pursued what you should pursue you don't know how much what's impossible to you right now would become possible under those conditions it's an unknown phenomena and like I've watched people who put themselves together across time you know incrementally and continually and they become capable of things that are taught not only jaw-droppingly amazingly but also sometimes metaphysically impossible to understand and so we don't know the limits of human endeavor we truly don't and it's premature to put a cap on what it is that we are what that what it is that we're capable of and so you you know you're already something and maybe you're not so bad in your current configuration but you might wonder if you did nothing for the next thirty years except put yourself together just exactly what would you be able to do and you might think well that's worth finding out but of course that's that's the adoption of responsibility and one thing I've also learned over the years because I've been curious about this battle between meaning and nihilism to know and I mean I mean I could see for a long while the rationale in nihilism and the power of the nihilistic argument but it occurred to me across time that despite that the power of the nihilistic argument is more powerful than naive optimism but it's not more powerful than the optimism that is not naive because the optimism that is not naive says it's self-evident that the world is place of suffering and that there are things to be done about that and it's self-evident that people are flawed and that there's things to be done about that and then the non naive optimist says the suffering could be reduced and the insufficient see could be overcome if people oriented themselves properly and did what they were capable of doing and I do not believe that that's deniable I do I do I think that human potential is virtually limitless and that there's nothing perhaps it's beyond our grasp if we're careful as individuals and as a society and so I think that there's no reason for nihilism that there's no reason for hopelessness and and there's no reason to bow down before evil because we're capable of so much more and I think that you can easily you know that first because you're not happy with who you are and you're ashamed and embarrassed about it as you should be and you know it because if you look out there you see people who are capable of doing great things and you know that we're not giving it our all and still we're not doing so badly you know and so you might wonder if if if we devoted 90% of our effort to putting things right instead of fifty-five percent of our efforts or maybe even less than that you might wonder just how well could things be put together and I think that you can figure that out by starting with your room by the way and the Lord said unto Abram and this is this is the this is the opening of the story get thee out of thy country and from thy kindred and from thy father's house unto a land that I will show thee and this is one of those phrases where every clause is significant go somewhere you don't understand that's the first thing get the out of thy country you know back in the 1920s there was a whole slew of American writers who ended up as expatriates in Paris Hemingway among them and and who wrote the Great Gatsby Fitzgerald yes and then a variety of others it was very inexpensive in Paris at the time and part of their transformation into great literary figures was the fact that they were out of their country and now they could see what their country was because you can't see what your country is until you leave it so you have to go into the unknown that's that's God's first command go into the unknown because you already know what you know and so and that's not enough unless you think you're enough and if you're not enough and you don't think you're enough then you have to go where you haven't been and so that's the first commandment to Abraham it's like okay that that's a good one that makes perfect sense go to where you don't know yes and from my kindred well that what does that mean means grow up right that's what it means it means get away from your family enough so that you can establish your independence and that isn't because there's something wrong with your family although perhaps there is you know as there is perhaps wrong with you but it means get away you know I talk to people very frequently whose families have provided them with too much protection and they know it themselves and that means they're deprived of necessity you know one of the things that you see in the United States for example is that the children of first generation immigrants often do better than the children they're children and the reason for that is that the children of first generation immigrants have necessity driving them and you don't know how much you need a necessity to drive you because maybe you're not very disciplined and if the catastrophe doesn't immediately befall you if you don't act forthrightly today then maybe you never act forthrightly right because the the gap between your foolishness and the punishment is is lengthened by your unearned wealth and so you never grow up and learn and you have to get yourself away from your dependency in order to allow necessity to drive you forward and that's to become independent and to become mature and I think part of what's happening in our culture is that the the force that's attacking the the fourth right movement forward of young men in particular is afraid of the power of men because it's confused about the distinction between power and authority and competence like an a man who's who has Authority and competence has power as a byproduct but the authority and competence is everything and and and people who can't understand that failed to make the distinction between power and authority of competence and they're afraid of power and so they destroy authority and competence and that's a terrible thing because we need authority and competence what else is going to what else is going to allow us to prevail in the long run and so you get away from your country and you get away from your kin and from your father's house right and you go out there and you establish yourself in the world it's a call to adventure that's what this the first lines in the Abrahamic story is a call to adventure so great unto a land that I will show you well you know what does that mean you know one of the things that I'd been struck very hard by a number of writers Carl young obviously among them I mean he he wrote things like Nietzsche that if you understand them they just break you into pieces you know and and one of the things that Jung understood in the psychoanalysts understand it's one of the most terrifying elements of psychoanalytic thinking is very tightly allied with religious thinking which is that you are not the master of your own house there are spirits that dwell in within you meaning you have a will and you can exercise a certain amount of conscious control over your being but there are all sorts of things that occur within you that seem to be beyond your capacity to control your dreams for example that's a really good example or your impulses for example you might you might think of those as so foreign from you that they're not even you don't even want them to be part of you but but more subtly even how about what you're interested in what compels you like where does that come from exactly because you can't you can't conjure it up of your own accord you know so if you're a student and you're taking difficult course you might say to yourself well I need to sit down and study for three hours but then you sit down and that is what happens your attention goes everywhere and you might say well whose attention is it then if it goes everywhere because you say it's your attentions like well if it's your attention maybe you would be able to control it but you can't and so then you might think well Jenin just exactly what the hell is controlling it and you might say well it's random it's the vall it's better not be random I can tell you that that's that happens to some degree in schizophrenia there's an element of randomness and it's not random it's driven by the action of phenomena that I think are best considered as something like subpersonalities although even that's only a partial description you can't make yourself interested in something interest manifests itself and grips you that's a whole different thing and so what is it that's gripping you and how do you conceptualize that is that a divine power well it's divine as far as you're concerned because it grips you and you can't do anything about it and so there's a calling in you towards what you're compelled by and what you're interested in and sometimes that might be very dark and sometimes not but you're compelled forward by your interest and so and so the idea that what moves you away from your country and your father's house and the comforts of your child at home is it's something that's beyond you and that you listen to and hearken to that's exactly right and you can say well I don't want to call that God it's like doesn't matter what you call it exactly it doesn't matter to what it is what it's called it still is and if you don't listen to it that's the other thing if you don't listen to it and I've been a clinician and talked to enough people now as old as I am to know this absolutely if you do not listen to that thing that beckons you forward you will pay for it like you cannot possibly imagine you'll have everything that's terrible about life in your life and nothing about it that's good and worse you'll know that it was your fault and that you squandered what you could have had so this is not only a calling forth but a warning unto a land that I will show thee and that's it that I will show thee that and you don't want to be too concrete about this you know there's all sorts of new territories that you can inhabit if you there's this abstract and conceptual territories of guilty University and you study biology or you study physics or or any discipline you're in a territory right you're in the territory that all the scholars have established and then as you master the discipline you move out beyond the established territory into the unknown and that's a new land right maybe it's even the land of your enemies for that matter but it's a new land the frontier is always in front of you and so you know when the earth was less inhabited than it is now the frontier was the psychological frontier and the geographical frontier was the same thing and now they've separated to some degree because there's not so much geographical volunteer but there's the frontier is a place that never disappears and the land that's beyond the land that you know is always there and it's always where you should go and all of that packed into these what four phrases so well so when I've been thinking about narrative you look at the world through a story you can't you can't help it and the story is what gives value to the world or or the story is what you extract from the value of the world you can look at it either way you're somewhere and it's not good enough right that's the eternal human predicament wherever you are isn't good enough and to some degree that's actually a good thing because if it was good enough well there's nothing for you to do so it's actually maybe a good thing that it's insufficient and that might be why sometimes having lessons is better than having more and I don't want to be a Pollyanna about that I mean I know that there's deprivation that can reach to the point where it's no where it's completely counterproductive but it isn't always the case that starting with little is you if you start with little you start with more possibility it's something like that so you moved from always from what's unbearable about the present to some better future right and if you don't have that then you have no you have nothing but threat and a negative emotion you have no positive emotion because the positive emotion is generated in the conception of the better future and then the evidence that you generate yourself that you're moving towards it that's where the positive and fulfilling meaning of life comes so you want to set up the structure properly it's very very important and so what it means is that you want to be going somewhere that's good enough so that the going is worth the while and you can ask yourself that and that's partly what we tried to build into the future authoring program which is well we know what's wrong with life it's rife with suffering and insufficiency and deception and evil it's all of that obviously okay what would make the journey worthwhile or you can ask yourself that it's like alright in order to bear up under this load what is it that I would need to be striving to attain and if you ask yourself that that's to knocking and the door will open that's what that means if you ask yourself that then you will find an answer and you'll think you'll shrink away from it you'll think well there's no way I could do that it's like well you don't know what you could do you don't know what's possible and you're not as much as you could be and so god only knows what you could what you could do and have and give if you sacrificed everything to it and that's the reason that Abraham is constantly making sacrifices and it's archaic right he's burning up like baby lambs but like well they're alive you know that's something and and they're valuable and that's something it's you have to admit even if you think about it as a modern person but the act of sacrificing something might have some dramatic compulsion to it you know to go out into a flock and to take something that's newborn and to cut its throat and to bleed it and to burn it might be a way of indicating to yourself that you're actually serious about something and it isn't so obvious that we have rituals of seriousness like that now and so it's not so obvious that we're actually serious about anything and so maybe that's not such a good thing and so maybe we shouldn't be thinking that these people were so archaic and primitive and superstitious it's possible that they knew something that we don't it's certainly in the or hammock stories one of the things that maintains Abraham's covenant with God is his continual willingness to sacrifice it it's so that sacrificial issue is so important because you are not committed to something unless you're willing to sacrifice for it commitment and sacrifice are the same thing and I think it's borders on miraculous that those concepts are embedded into this narrative at the level of dramatic action you know instead of abstract explanation people are acting this out and then the fundamental conception is so profound that it's really quite it's quite inspiring it's breathtaking really when you understand what message is trying to be conveyed you have to make sacrifices and what you have to sacrifice you have to sacrifice that which is most valuable to you currently that's stopping you and god only knows what that is it's certainly the worst of you it's certainly that and god only knows to what degree you're in love with the worst of you so well so you move from the unbearable present to the ideal future and and you can't help that you have to live in the structure like that that's your house that's another way of thinking about it and if you want to get your house in order and if it you want it to be a place that you can live properly then you have to plan the future that is perfect and then I think well what does that mean and it means it's good for you right and one of the things that I'm I do all the time with my clinical and consulting clients is trying to figure out what would be good for them but we do more than that we try to think okay well what how can we set this up so it's really good for you and that all the side consequences of that are things that are good for other people and so because people are often also tended about trying to get something that's good for themselves because they feel that it's selfish or that they don't deserve it so we set it up so that well look we're going to set it up so that it's plainly obvious that this will not harm the structure of the universe for you to have what you need and to do it in a way that's of benefit to other people there's no downside to that and so it's okay it's okay if you reach out and take that and one of the things that's interesting about the biblical stories Abrahamic stories as well is that God doesn't really seem to be opposed to the success of the people that he's chosen you know what happens to them is that they progress through their journey as they they get larger flocks and they they get more authority and they they get they get more they get life more abundant that's what happens it's God isn't does it seem to be a miser in the Old Testament it's like if you put in the effort and you and you accept the covenant and you make the sacrifices then you get to be successful and maybe successful beyond your wildest dreams and that that's actually seems to be okay with God and that's pretty cool given that you know that the general notion of Old Testament God is that all he's doing is casting out curses and death you know wherever he happens to wander and I mean there's certainly no shortage of that but but again it seems to me that that's very good news and that you also don't have to be perfect in order for to have that happen and then the other thing this is the issue about going into the unknown it's like well if you leave your country and your kin and your father's house and you go out into a land that your intuition guides you to you're going to undergo these radical transformations this is the sacrificial transformation too because you're you're moving forthrightly and voluntarily into chaos right and that's the same as the dragon fight that's the hero story and what will happen there is that you will transform yourself and so the call to an ideal is also the call to a sequence of deaths and rebirths that move you closer and closer to the ideal and that's what that's what God is calling Abraham to do in the first sentence of this story you see these things echoed in the strangest places and so these are stills that I took from Pinocchio and this little cricket so he's the still small voice right that's the thing that calls to you it's your conscious conscience and part it's your intuition in part and it's the thing that opens up the great book of the world the great sacred book of the world and that's what happens here right and the animators are at pains to show you that it's a leather-bound book with gilt lettering it's a valuable book and it's something that's quiet that's showing it to you right you have to meditate let's say you have to be somewhere where the world isn't drowning you out in order to understand how to open this to listen to that voice that tells you where you should go with what you should do next and then what happens is that something beckons to you in the night it's a star right it's something that transcends the horizon it's it's glitters it's brilliant it's it's not day to day it's something that's beyond you it's something that represents a transcendent ideal and that makes it manifest to you if you're quiet enough to listen and that's what you wish upon so strangely right and people do that they wish upon a star they teach their children that and they don't know why well what do you mean you wish upon a star what the world does that mean it means you lift your eyes to the heavens and make a pact with the transcendent and then you're and then what your hearts desire will come to you that's what it means and you think well that's so that's not naive it's the most sophisticated thing that you can know and it's the birth of the hero right because that's the that's the nativity star obviously and this is where it takes place it's just anywhere and the person it is just a carpenter and a toy maker but that's pretty good a carpenter if you're a deceitful carpenter then your house falls down and if you're a toy maker then you love children it's that's good start you know so so Geppetto who lives in this little it's it's a it's not a grand house it's it's just in every day house but everything that's happening and it is good and so that means it's it's a palace because everything in it is how that's happening good there's the saying and I don't remember where it comes from then it's better to have bread and water in peace than a feast in conflict and that's not a saying that's just the starkest possible description of the truth because there's nothing worse than eating a grand meal with people you hate and despise that are at each other's throats it's much better to have bread and water in peace it's it's not it it's just clear-headed analysis of the structure of the world to say things like that and so the magical transformation can happen in the most mundane of places because and the reason for that is that the mundane nature of places is an illusion because every place is the potential birthplace of the kingdom of God that's the case and so Geppetto he's a good guy he has a kitten you know the kitten likes him he makes puppets and he's humble person and he knows that compared to the ideal that he's attempting to subscribe to that he's he's not a based before it or anything like that he's not despicable in relationship to it but the reason he's on his knees is because the thing he's pointing at is above him you know he he it wouldn't be the right aim if it wasn't above him and so the fact that he's on his knees so to speak is only an indication that his aim is proper because you should be on your knees to something that you actually admire and if you don't feel like being on your knees in front of it then perhaps you don't actually admire it and then that means you haven't got the stage set properly it could be it should be something that fills you with awe your aim should should be add something that fills you with awe because whatever why do something else well perhaps because it's easy and perhaps because it's malevolent and all of those things but but those are no answer to the problems that beset you they just make things worse and that's clear and so then Gepetto have is having made his pact his covenant just like Abraham he falls into a dream right he falls into a dream and the rest of the movie actually takes place in a dream and it's a dream it's the dream within which transformation takes place and that's laid out at least in part time stops in in the pinocchio story and everything happens to Pinocchio in some sense in a land it's outside of normal time and that's that's the infinite archetypal space and that's a real place that's a real place the infinite and the finite coexist and most of the time we're in the place of the finite but that doesn't mean that the place of this infinite doesn't exist it just means that we can't get access to it we just get intimations of it from time to time you know when things are going perfectly well for you on those rare occasions where everything comes together for the brief moment you inhabit that divine place and you have some sense of what your life could be like if you organized it from the smallest element to the largest element and that's a place that you can inhabit if not forever in a manner that at least felt like forever well because of Gepetto's decisioned the transcendent manifests itself it takes the form of the blue fairy here that's the positive element of nature right so we could say well nature it's not so clear that she's on your side right she's the Red Queen and Alice in Wonderland who runs around screaming when you go down the rabbit hole she runs around screaming off with their heads and who says in my kingdom you have to run as fast as you can just to stay in the same place that's mother nature but then we might say well how do we know that mother nature's attitude towards you isn't negative because your attitude towards things isn't proper and that's what this film attempts to indicate the idea is that if you aim properly then nature aligns itself behind you now it also arrays itself in front of you perhaps even as an antagonist but the power that it it it provides you with from within might be sufficient to overcome it from without and i think that i think that the clinical evidence is clear about that because one of the things that we do know is that if you take people who are confronting terrible things and shrinking from them and you teach them how to structure their behavior so that they can advance with courage everything works better for them their fears decrease and their character grows and so there might be enough of nature within us to help us withstand the nature that's outside of us and it depends at least to some degree and how it is that we orient ourselves in the world to some into some unknowable degree now Geppetto wants an autonomous individual as a son and that's also something that makes him a great person because autonomous individuals have their own will and if you're a tyrant it's the last thing that you're going to want and if you're the tyrant who's jealous of his son it's even more so the last thing you're ever going to want and so to aim high and to want the development of the autonomous individual are the same thing and I would say that's the core story in some sense of Western culture is that to aim high and to develop the autonomous individual are the same thing and that's what happens in Pinocchio that's what happens in the story of Abraham and the transformation takes place the magical transformation and in the Pinocchio story one of the things that's so interesting about it and this is part of its mythological substructure from the scientific perspective there's only two determining forces with regards to the destiny of the individual there's nature deterministic and culture deterministic and then scholars wrangle about which of those is the greater force but in mythological stories there's always a third element and that third element is something like autonomous consciousness and there's no place for autonomous consciousness in the deterministic story of nature and culture but we all act as if autonomous consciousness is the primary reality and the biblical stories are predicated on the idea that autonomous consciousness is what gives rise to the world and I don't think that we're in a position to presume that that is necessarily in error and so what that means is to aim high and to develop the autonomous individualist is simultaneously the decision to formulate an allegiance with the the conscious power that brings being into existence and that all takes place inside this little puppet and then he has his adventures right he's he's he's still half jackass and half deceptive but he still despite that and despite all the errors he has the capacity to move forward and to transform it into something to transform himself into something that can be properly considered described as a true son of God and that's the Rite Aid and it works like this as far as I can tell you know when I talk to people about doing the Future authoring program they often put it off and it's not surprising because it's hard and and be it but it's more than that they think well I don't know how to write I'm going to do a bad job I don't really like assignments I'm going to have to do it perfectly I need to wait till I have enough time and like one of those is enough to stop you cold and all five of them you're just done and so I tell people do it haphazardly a tiny bit at a time and badly because you can do that I tell my students when they're doing their thesis master's thesis write a really bad first draft and then we have a little conversation about that because they don't think I mean that because it sounds like a cliche in some sense it's not a cliche it's not a cliche at all it means you're a terrible writer but but if someone put a gun to your head and said you have to have your hundred page pieces done by next Monday or I'll shoot you but I don't care how terrible it is you would sit down and write it and the thing is then you have it right then then you have something and then you can fix it you could iterate and fix it that bad first draft that's the most valuable thing and so that's what you need you need a bad first draft of yourself and there's there's an idea that young developed about the trickster and the Jester the comedian right that the trickster is the precursor to the Savior that's one of the things I learned from young it was just it's so unlikely you never think that it's so amazing that that my be the case but the the the satirical in the Iran Akande and the troublemaker that the comedian the fool the fool is the precursor to the savior why because you're a fool when you start something new and so if you're not willing to be a fool then you'll never start anything new and if you never start anything new then you won't develop and so the willingness to be a fool is the precursor to transformation and that's the same as humility and so if you're going to write your destiny you can do a bad first job you're going to get smarter as you move forward that's the thing is that so something beckons to you that's what happens here maybe the star that Geppetto wished on was the wrong damn star but at least it was a star right at least it was in the sky at least it moved him forward and so you say in your life well something grips you and it fills you with interest and you think well should I do that an answer is if not that then something what if it's a mistake it's a mistake rest assured what do you know you're going to stumble around right and what's going to happen is this you're going to move to you're going to not stay in stasis you're not going to wander around in circles and I see people like that they said well I never knew what to do and now I'm 40 it's like that's not so good that's not so good and you might say well and there is a literature too that suggests that people are a lot more unhappy when they look back in their lives about the things they didn't do than they are about the mistakes they made while they were doing things and so that's really worth thinking about too because there's redemptive mistakes and a redemptive mistake would be a mistake that you make when you go out and try to do something you know you actually you think okay I'm going to try to do this when you're not good at it you make a bunch of mistakes it's like what's the consequence if you pay attention is you're not quite so stupid anymore that's the thing is you've been informed by your by the results of your errors and so what happens is you follow the beacon you follow the light and and you're blind so you don't know where the light is it's dimly apprehended only and you're afraid to follow it but you decide to take some stumbling steps towards it and as you take stumbling steps towards it you become illuminated and enlightened and informed because of the nature of your experience because you're pushing yourself beyond where you are and you're going into the country that you have not yet been in and you learn something and so what happens then is the star moves you move 10 feet towards it you think no that's not right I didn't get it right it isn't there it's actually there and so then you you see it somewhere else and you shift yourself slightly and you move forward and that's what happens is that you continue as you change the thing that guides you forward moves right it's like God in the in the in the desert in Egypt the pillar of light that you're following it's moving it's not a permanent thing you move towards it it moves away it guides you forward and so you say well is what I'm aiming at paradise itself and the answer to that is no because what do you know you you couldn't see paradise if it was right in front of you but you might get a glimmer of it and so you move towards it and you grow and then the next time you open your eyes you see a little bit more clearly and that's what happens is that just happens over and over right it keeps moving and so you move like this but the thing that's so cool is that although zigs and zags you say in each of those zags is it and zigs is a catastrophe I hit a wall my god and then I had to die a little bit and I barely got back up it's a Phoenix transformation at each at each turn and it's painful but the thing is is that even though you've you've traveled 20 miles let's say on that road and you've only moved 3 miles forward you've moved three miles forward instead of falling backwards because that's the thing too is that if you stand still you fall backwards you cannot stand still because the world moves away from you if you stand still and there's no stasis there's only backwards and so if you're not moving backward back forwards then you're moving backwards and that's more more of the underlying truth of the Matthieu principle to those who have everything more will be given from those who have nothing everything we'll be taken it's a warning do not stay in one place well as you dig and zag maybes and maybe the Cataclysm of each transformation starts to lessen there's not so much of you that has to die with every mistake and maybe you end up oriented at least reasonably properly if you were sensible that would have been your trip but it wasn't right it's that and perhaps it's a lot worse than that perhaps there's no shortage of backtracking but it doesn't matter because as you stumble forward you illuminate and inform yourself and perhaps that's partly because the world is made of information and if you encounter it and tangle with it then it informs you and then you become informed and then your information and then you're ready and so God says to Abraham I will make of thee a great nation and I will bless thee and make thy name great and thou shalt be a blessing that's that's a good offer fundamentally I mean it means what does it mean to to be made a great nation of well perhaps it has something to do directly with your descendants but I don't think it's just that you know is if you're a force for good in the world then that radiates out from you and if you're good enough it's difficult to say how much of an impact on things you could have you know Dostoyevsky who is a very crazy person partly because of his epilepsy he said a man is not only responsible for everything he does but for everything that everyone else does and you think well no no no and yes sometimes no sometimes that's what you think if you're cataclysmic cataclysmically depressed right is that your sins are so egregious that that they're unforgivable and that in some manner you're at you're at fault for everything that's terrible with world but there's actually truth than that and there's actually redemptive truth in that is that things wouldn't be so bad if you weren't so if you weren't so far from what you could be and that's terribly pessimistic because it's all on you man but it's terribly optimistic because God there's a lot of things that you could do and if you're crying out for something to do then that's the best news you could possibly have it's like things aren't so good but you know are you so if you stop doing the things that you knew to be destructive which is the right place to start you know if you're going to clean up your room what do you do first well you just get rid of the mess you know and you know what now no one has to come in and tell you hopefully what's the worst mess it's just it announces itself to you and you can certainly know yourself and this is a very easy meditative exercise to sit down and think okay I'm doing one thing really stupidly that I should stop doing it's like how long is it going to take you to figure out what that is it's about two seconds right you've known it forever but you could even make it less demanding you could say there are some stupid things that I'm doing that I know are stupid and wrong that I could stop doing that I would stop doing and then you can just start with that and you can just do that and maybe it's just a little thing although it's not because it's it's a it's a step forward on the proper voyage it's not a small thing and you think well what would happen you could say let's do this for a year even a month just try not to do things you know to be stupid and wrong for a month and that means not to say things you know to be stupid and wrong as well maybe that's the most important thing just do it as an experiment see what happens and so fun because I have people writing to me from all over the world who are saying they're doing that they're saying well you know I cleaned up my room and and then I stopped saying stupid things and my god it's like things are way better it's like who would have guessed it you know and so it's low-hanging fruits man because they're saying that's the other thing if there's a lot of things wrong with you then it's it's really easy to start fixing it you know you got so much there's so much territory that you can inhabit I will make of thee a great nation I will bless thee that's good I mean the whole nation thing that's positive but to have God on your side that's you know you might want that when things get rough that would be good and make that name great and now it shall be a blessing wonderful that's a good deal then I will bless them that bless thee that's good too and curse him that curseth thee and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed that's something that's something that wouldn't it be something if you could wake up and your day was composed in part of people thanking you for all the good things you've done in the world would that be good it's not impossible for that to happen so Abram departed yes as the Lord had spoken unto him and Lord went with and the neighbor him was seventy in five years when he departed out of her and that's all now Abraham lives a long time but this is also part of the story so he has a wife who can't have children he has nothing obviously he's been hanging around dad's Shack for a little too long given that he's 75 right it's kind of time to get a fire lit underneath him a bit and so it is not got much going for him but he still decides to to move forward and I've seen this too you know like if you don't have your destiny in hand by your time you're thirty it's it's rough you start hurting and if you don't have your destiny in hand by the time you're 40 then you really start hurting and 40 is a real fork in the road the fork in the road that's always where you meet the devil by the way and that's because every time you have to make a decision the possibility of evil beckons that's why that is I had a friend I told you a little about him and he killed himself just after 40 you know he had had a book published and with a very small press he was quite a good writer but he could not get himself together and it hit him too hard at 40 and I'm not saying that it's hopeless at 40 I'm not saying that and I'm not saying that partly because of these verses but also partly because of in my clinical practice I've had people come to me who have had very chaotic and ill-spent lives let's say who were in that neighborhood of age and and it's true for people who are older as well who then decided to make a real effort and to try to make where they were better you know instead of being bitter about where they weren't because that's better nasteria lee does you in it's really not good it's the opposite of gratitude it's it's it's the manifestation of resentment it makes you malevolent it's very very bad to be better it's not it's not it's hell to be bitter and if you're 40 and you're not successful then you have to accept your lot and you have to start to improve what's right in front of you and if you do that it doesn't take very long it's quite interesting to watch people things can be a lot better in six months and they can be way better in two years like it's a struggle uphill struggle but it's by no means impossible and and I don't know again what the limit of that is I suppose it depends to degree to some degree on the degree of your commitment but anyway so abran other indication of the real validity of this story God isn't setting this up to be easy right Abraham's old and his and his wife is old too and more than that she's barren how is he going to be the father of Nations how is he going to be successful well the initial departure point is insufficient radically insufficient and and that's very inspiring because it means that you can start from where you are so Abram departed as the Lord had spoken unto him and lot went with him and Abram was 75 years old when he departed out of Haran and Abram took Sarai his wife and lot his brother's son and all their substance that they had gathered and they know he has a relationship with law right he doesn't have his own son but he his brother died and so he takes his nephew as his son that's grateful you know he could be very angry and have nothing to do with him because he didn't get his own son but that isn't that isn't what happens is he's offered a substitute let's say and he accepts it and so good for him you know and and that's an it's also something that I've seen that characterizes people who can make the best of a bad lot is they don't get exactly what they want but something comes along that offers possibilities that are sufficient perhaps if exploited properly and they open their heart and welcome them in instead of rejecting them in bitterness and so that's a good thing and that's part of Abraham's character and Abram took Sarai his wife and law his brothers son and all their substance that they had gathered and all the souls that they had gotten in her on and they went for us to go into the land of Canaan into exile let's say and into the land of Canaan they came and that's another repetition of the transformation story right you have to go to a land where you're not welcome an abram passed through the land unto the place of CGM unto the plain of mora and the Canaanite was then in the land and the Lord appeared unto Abram and said unto thy seed I will give you this land and there he builded an altar to the Lord who appeared unto him and he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of the cell and pitched his tent having the fell on the west and high on the east and there he built an altar unto the Lord and called upon the name of the Lord now we don't understand these rituals precisely you know I don't know if the people who did this engaged in a meditative ritual without the idea that you take something of value you do this youyou undertake this dramatic transformation a life and death transformation and is that an aid to meditation and what you do do you sit down and thank you you pray pray being to ask you know - what do I do next how do I orient myself in the world as a useful exercise to do that - I think it's something that people could do every morning I think it's useful to sit down and think okay what's the most important thing I should do today what I have an array of things that call to me to be done some of which I will do with joy and some of which I will bear as responsibilities but I raised em selves in front of me and with what should I attend to first well do you ask or do you decide and it seems to me when I do it because I do it all the time I do it every morning I try to sit down and think okay I've got things that I would like to do and things that call to me out of necessity what do i do first and it's not so much a decision as it is a question and I don't know what I'm calling on it's I'm calling on my capacity to think I suppose but that's not my capacity exactly I'm there I can I can commune with whatever provides answers and I can think that that's me thinking but and I didn't that I believe that I can't think I do believe that I can consciously think but that's not the same as calling for inspiration it's not the same process just like a dream is not conscious thinking it's something that happens to you and that kind of inspiration is also something that happens to you because I ask myself well what's the most important thing I could do next and then I have an answer to that but it isn't because I decided exactly I've decided that I'll do it whatever it is and that I want to know what it is those are the decisions but but there's an involuntary aspect to the sorting that occurs and and that's the psychological equivalent I suppose to this and I guess the sacrifice is when I feel that I will do whatever it is that calls to be done then I don't do the other things that I might want to do and that's a sacrifice it's to me it's the proper sacrifice because my sense is that things don't go properly unless you do what's most important and if I want things to go properly and I do because I've had my taste of things not going properly I want things to go properly and so then it's not so difficult to do what's necessary to to do what makes things go properly under those circumstances and it's partly see this is partly why the story of Sodom and Gomorrah is embedded in the Abrahamic stories I think because that's an apocalyptic story right if things go badly enough the whole city is destroyed and then and the reason it goes badly is because the people in the city do not behave properly and the people in the city might bu and so if you're not behaving properly then you go and so does the city and maybe you don't want maybe you do want that but maybe you don't want that and if you don't want that then maybe and you know that if you don't do things property then it's you and the city if you actually know that then maybe that terrifies you badly enough so that you're willing to make the sacrifice to do the right things instead of the impulsive things that you might otherwise want to do you know I learned from Viktor Frankl and from Karl yoga and from Alexander Solzhenitsyn and for many of the people whose works on the Holocaust that I read and on the catastrophes in the Soviet Union and the people who studied it most deeply always came to the same conclusion the state became corrupted because each individual allowed themselves to be corrupted or perhaps participated joyfully in the process of being corrupted and the consequence of that was the end of the world and so what that means is that if you don't behave properly then you bring about the end of the world and maybe you think well that's only the end of your world fair enough or maybe it's the only the end of your family's world you know which I suppose might give you some pause but there's more to it than that because you're connected to everyone else and what you do that isn't good distributes itself and all the things you don't do that could be good take away from the whole and so if you know that and I do think you know that if you take it seriously because if you look at if you look at historical events the cataclysmic events of the 20th century seriously I do not think that you can fail to come to that conclusion and Abraham journeyed going on still towards the south that's interesting because to go south means to go downhill too it's not good to go south it's colloquial for going to where you shouldn't go and this is what happens to Abram you know he his a cent is preceded by a descent and that's very common in life I would say and so it's a little the redemptive element of this narrative is that if the Covenant is constructed properly so it's an arc which is your decision to align yourself with God for all intents and purposes then even the journey south can be part of a broader journey upward and there was a famine in the land that's Mother Nature failing to cooperate I mean that's going to be pretty disheartening for Abraham don't you think is he finally gets it together when he's 75 to leave and then you know because God says well do you not get going and and so the first place he goes everyone's starving to death it's like you know you might think about that as a test of faith wouldn't you say but he keeps going and then what happens well he has to go to Egypt so great he goes where he's starving where everyone's starving and then to get away from where everyone's starving he goes to a tyranny so the whole beginning of the story is not particularly auspicious and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there for the famine was Grievous in the land it's a repetition of the same idea again there's downhill voyage out into chaos right it's repeated over and over that the beginning of Abraham's journey is basically a sequence of of experiences of Exile chaos tyranny and catastrophe well you should be able to relate to that you know how hard it is to get things together you know you go out to do what you're supposed to do say and there's you're beset by the intransigence of the world and failure well so what are you supposed to do about that well maintain your faith in the good and continue to move forward that's the idea and part of that even if even if you don't buy the metaphor it's like what are you going to do instead that won't make it worse so even if there it isn't enough that you're pursuing your at least for stalling the transfer may of the chaos into your of your life into sheer hell and that can certainly happen you know you see people who are having a terrible time and then you see people who are having a terrible time who are also in hell and it's a lot better to just have a terrible time than to have a terrible time and be in hell at the same time and it came to pass when he was come too near to enter into Egypt that he said unto Sarai his wife behold now I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon therefore it shall come to pass when the Egyptians shall see thee that they shall say this is his wife and they will kill me that they will save thee alive so look I mean Abraham is Abram is really having a rough time he's a failure right I mean he's wandering around through the land of starvation now he's going to go be a quasi slave in Egypt he has this incredibly attractive wife and all he can look forward to is the fact that the most successful man in Egypt the Pharaoh will take her from him so he's got the whole embitterment thing pretty much nailed down as far as I can tell and this is when he makes one of his errors let's say and one of the errors that humanizes him say I pray thee that thou art my sister that may be well for me for thy sake and my soul shall live because of thee and it came to pass that when Abram was coming to Egypt the Egyptians beheld the woman that was she was very fair the Prince is also a pharaoh saw her and commended her before Pharaoh and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house and he entreated Abram well for her sake and he had sheep and oxen and he houses and menservants and maidservants as she houses and camels so actually things work out pretty well for for Abram despite his deceit right which is quite interesting and I guess it's because if the overarching structure is solid something like that it's something like that then then errors can still be forgiven to speak about it from a metaphorical perspective and the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abrams wife well it doesn't seem very fair but because the Pharaoh didn't know but but it's not the right way to look at it the right way to look at it see there's a story later in the in the Bible about David and David David could be a pretty bad guy you know so one of the things he does is when he becomes king he's in his castle and he's looking over the city and he sees a woman nude bathing nude sunbathing nude on a roof out on the city and he's smitten by her floored by her and he has inquiries made about who she is her name is Beth Sheba and and he finds out who her husband is and her husband actually happens to be a general in his army and he arranges for that general to be put at the thick of the battle and killed and then he takes Bathsheba so and and and the Lord is not pleased by that let's put it that way and that's interesting is only did it's an interesting story because you might say well why can't the King do whatever the hell he wants like seriously he's the king he's not just he's not like the Prime Minister the president right he's the king and so you might say well why is the King subject to any rules whatsoever what's the rationale for the king being subject to rules well the rationale emerges in these stories if there are social strictures that are such that even if the ruler of the land transgresses against them there will be hell to pay and that's continually presented over and over in the biblical stories and it's a natural law sort of idea that there are there are intrinsic rules to the game of social human being and if you and maybe intrinsic rules to this to the natural state of human being you break those rules consciously or unconsciously at your absolute peril and not only at your peril but at the peril of the state and it doesn't matter who you are and so I would say this is actually an indication of God being fair rather than being unfair because the rule here is Pharaoh or not you don't get to take someone else's wife and the ignorance is no excuse now you might say that's a little bit harsh and perhaps it is a little bit harsh but it's not without merit the idea is not without merit and of course Abram is implicit in this despite that he is successful and Pharaoh called Abram and said what is this that thou has done unto me why did so now tell me that she was thy wife why said Stowe you she is my sister I might have taken her to me to wife now therefore behold thy wife take her and go thy way and Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him and they sent him away and his wife and all that he had and Abram went out of Egypt he and his wife and all that he had in lot with him into the south and Abram was very rich in cattle in silver and in gold and that's it so what's interesting you know big Abraham he he goes to the place of famine and then he goes to the to the place of charity and then he he lies and then he almost loses his wife but because he goes things work out for him and so hooray for that and he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning between Bethel and high unto the place of the altar so he makes another sacrifice which he had made there at the first and there Abram called on the name of the Lord well so he's had an adventure right he's he's he's finished his journey and and so there's a culminating point in this narrative and now I just know what to do he's left the place he said he doesn't know what to do so it's time to build an altar and make a sacrifice and figure out and to ask for divine guidance once again to figure out okay well I've done that been there done that what's next and I'm the question is asked seriously and this is something to consider if you want to know what to do ask seriously and say I'm willing to see Abraham sacrifices a life to his vow well so what do you do well you don't sacrifice an animal you don't you don't make a blood sacrifice you do it psychologically you say I'm going to sacrifice my life to the same that's what you do if you're serious what do I do next well I'm going to sacrifice my life to this aim what is it that I should do that's worth sacrificing my life to that's a serious question well then maybe that's the sort of question that people don't ask because they're afraid of the seriousness of the question and and what the magnitude of the potential answer do you really want to know what you should do that would be worth sacrificing your life to well the answer is yes because it's worth it but the answer is also no because what really it's your life you know what if you're wrong and you're probably wrong but maybe that doesn't matter maybe it doesn't matter because maybe the rightness is in the process and not in the and not in the decision right because it's not it's the beginning of a sequence of decisions as we've already pointed out to the place of the altar which he had made there at the first and there Abram called on the name of the Lord and Lord also and Lord also which went with Abraham Abram had flocks and herds and tents and the land was not able to bear them that they might dwell together for their substance was great so that they could not dwell together and there was a strife between the herdsmen of Abrams cattle the Cowboys and the herdmen of lost cattle and the Canaanite and the perizzite dwelled then in the land well that's interesting too because you know Abraham's having a pretty good time of it now right he's out of starvation hey that's good he's out of the tyranny now he's kind of wealthy and then the story flips on him he's wealthy and now a bad thing happens to him right it's that he's got all this wealth and so does his nephew now they can't get along because they have too much stuff so that's quite comical as well that I think that's a comic interlude here now they handle it properly and Abram said unto Lord let there be no strife I pray they between me and thee and between my herdmen and I heard them because we're brothers it's not the whole land before they separate thyself I pray thee from me if you'll take the left then all take the right or if you depart to the right then I'll go to the left so basically they sit down and say well you know one of us has got to get out of town and it can be one or the other it doesn't really matter we can flip a coin or but we have to we have to separate and so they do it amicably and Lord lifted up his eyes and looked at all of the plain of Jordan that it was well watered everywhere so that's an intimation of Eden right because you remember he even means well watered place before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah even as the Garden of the Lord like the land of Egypt as thou comest unto Zoar so interesting you get foreshadowing here again right so Lawton Abram are making the decision about where to go and and law it looks out and and sees a reasonable place but then this warning comes up that there's a city out there there's a place out there where things are not going to go well things are being done badly and things are not going to go well then Lord shows him all the plain of Jordan and law journeyed East and they separated themselves the one from the other Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan and lot dwelled in the cities of the plain and pitched his tent towards Sodom but the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly now the word sin I've mentioned this to you before I think it's an interesting word it's it's the derivation of an archery term in my understanding of its derivation and it the Greek word was hamartia and Hammar he is an archery term which means to to miss the bullseye and you think it's worth thinking about that metaphorically because you've got to think about all the ways that you could miss the bullseye right you can close your eyes that's very common you could just not lift up the damned bow and arrow to begin with you could face the wrong way you could be unskilled in your aim but I'm and I also like the the archery metaphor because human beings are built on a hunting platform right and we always aim at things were things that were ballistic creatures on a trajectory always and we're always aiming at something we're always aiming at the mark and which is of course what you do when you hunt right because you have to hit the mark precisely and that's what we're like and so what we're like that psychologically we have to aim at something and then move towards it and and so to sin is to miss the mark is to is to miss the bullseye to to fail to take aim to aim badly gain carelessly or to not aim at all and that says well that's that's like a sin of omission that's to not do and then to be wicked is to aim at what you know you shouldn't aim at and again I don't I don't think of that as an external morality precisely I think that you can read the entire biblical narrative again from a psychological perspective and say we're not talking about external codes of conduct here although we could we're not the wickedness that's being described is the act of you doing something that you know to be wrong period you know and you may do something you don't know if it's wrong or not that isn't a sort of thing that we're talking about and we're not talking about the things that you do that are right there that other people think are wrong we're not talking about those either we're talking about those things that you consciously do although you know them to be wrong yourself and that's the things that seem to get people into the most trouble in these stories and I believe that to be the case I think that's very accurate psychologically it's amazing because I see this all the time if you do something wrong it's because you're Stig nur n't you don't know better it doesn't go well for you that's the case but if you do something wrong and you know it's wrong the punishment is is manifold and I think the reason for that I think the reason for that is because that makes you Cain it means you betray your own ideal right if you just don't know well you haven't betrayed your ideal you're just not together maybe you're even willfully blind but if you do something you know to be wrong then you've betrayed your own ideal and that lands you Cain says to God once Cain destroys Abel he says I cannot bear my punishment and the Lord said unto Abram after that lot was separated from lift up now thine eyes look upward and look from the place where thou art northward and southward and eastward and westward for all the land which thou seest to thee I will give it and to thy seed forever and I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth so that if a man can number the dust of the earth then shall all the I seed be numbered arise walk through the land in the length of it and the breadth of it for I will give it unto thee in the cathedral at shark I can't say that properly because my French is non-existent so a cathedral is across and the transformation takes place at the crux of the cross which is exactly right because the transformation takes place at the point of maximal suffering and the cathedral is designed to indicate that right symbolically now what happens in the religious ceremony is also a journey and it's a journey in some sense to the holy city and then that's also played out in the idea of pilgrimage right because you go to the holy city actually you go to Jerusalem or wherever it is that you think the holy city is you go there and that takes you out of your country and away from your kin and away from your family into the strange land and as you make the journey you transform and when you come back you're not the same that's the Hobbit right that's the story of the Hobbit but let's say you can't afford to go on a pilgrimage so you go to the cathedral at Chartres and there's a huge maze on the ground and it's the world north west south and east just as God describes here so it's laid out and you enter the maze at one side and in the middle is a stone pattern that looks like a flower and it's it's the place where being wells forth and it's at the center of the Cathedral and what that means is that if you accept your suffering then you move to the place where the spirit of being wells forth that's what that means and so you enter the maze and you walk and it's divided into quadrants and you walk one quadrant completely and then the mains pathway takes you into the next quadrant and you walk that completely and then it takes you to the third one and the fourth one and then when you walk the maze completely everywhere when you've gone everywhere in the world north south east and west where you when you traverse the territory completely then you come to the center and then it's yours and that's what this is so I've noticed when I've been renovating houses I like to do that I paid a lot of attention to the psychological process of a house renovation because I learned from young that young said this this is something man he said if he was he was talking about the stages of integration psychological integration and he looked beyond Piaget I would say although Piaget looked very far he said here's a conjunction you have to get your rationality on your emotion together that's a male/female conjunction symbolically speaking male rationality female emotionality you want to bring those together so that they're oriented in the same direction your emotions in your rationality served the same purpose so then you're unified in mind and spirit let's say that's are good enough once you've got that together then there's a boat you have a body and then that's a male/female conjunction again a divine conjunction the recreation of Adam before his division into female and male and the reconstruction of the androgynous Christ that all that all those ideas are linked together so now you have your emotion and your rationality moving in the same direction but you're not acting it out so now you have to unite that abstract part of you with your body and start acting out what you think and feel and that's the next conjunction but it's not the last one the last conjunction is when you realize that there is no distinction between you and your experience they're the same thing and so then when you put together your house you're putting together yourself so I've noticed in when I've lived in places rented or owned didn't matter and if there were part of the place if there was a part of the place that I hadn't attended to whatever that might mean it might meant cleaned it might have meant fix but it certainly meant at least thoroughly investigated then that was chaos it was like it was it was like the desert that part that's that's a way of thinking about it it wasn't mine even if I owned it wasn't mine I had to interact with it before it became mine and I had to interact with it and I had to put it in order and then it became mine and then and then to the degree that it became mine and was in order then I was also put in order now you know that because you go into places that make you uncomfortable and maybe it's your own house it's highly probable it's highly probable I you know I walk into well Chinese doctors do this traditional Chinese doctors they go into place people's place and they they diagnose their health conditions on the on the balance of yin and yang chaos an order they walked into a house that this is easy to do you walk into a house there's too much chaos hey you can detect that in no time flat everything is out of order and chaotic you don't even want to be there you certainly don't want to open the refrigerator that's for sure and there are things that should have been done years ago everywhere and every one of those things is a fight that hasn't happened and something that's being avoided and you can't even walk in there and maintain your health this is you walk in there you're sicker than you were when you were outside and that's one sort of place and then another sort of place is you go and look at the living room and the person has vacuumed the living room rug and the lines that were vacuumed are parallel to one another and the and the furniture is covered with plastic and you get a glass of water and then just as you're going to set it down on the coffee table the person rushes over and puts a coaster underneath it and everything in that house says to you that it would be a lot more perfect in that house if you were either not there or dead and that's there and that's the message that the whole house is blasting at you and if you happen to live there then you're going to be sick and what you're going to be sick from is too much order and in the other house you're going to be sick from too much chaos and so when you interact with a house the unexplored parts are the chaos that have that parts that you have not yet contended with are the chaos that has not yet been transformed by your embodied logos action into habitable territory and it does not belong to you arise walk through the land in the length of it and the breadth of it for I will give it unto thee the neighbor him removed his tent and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre which is in Hebron and built there an altar unto the Lord and it came to pass in the days of amraphel king of shinar arioch king of ellasar chair de L'Amour there's a lot of kings we won't talk about them he's made war with barrett king of sodom and with Persia king of gomorrah she and ab king of admah and the king of bela wishes or and these were joined together in the Vale of Siddim which is the salt sea hmm now this is actually very much relevant because you see the Vale of Siddim which is the salt sea is the farthest south you can go if South is down because it's the Dead Sea and the Dead Sea is the lowest place that there is so what's happened is that there's chaos in the lowest place that there is that's what this story says and what happens to lawd is he gets tangled up in the chaos of the lowest place that there is and in the fourteenth year came Chidori l'amour and the kings that were with him and smote the ref Eames and Ashtaroth her name and the Susan's and ham and the Emmons and shava Korea Korea Thames and the horites in their mount sire unto Alperin which is by the wilderness and they returned and came to end mishpat which is Kadesh and smote all the country the Amalekites Amalekites and the amorite that dwelt in has a cup houses Zonta my hey hey hazards on tomorrow there we go perhaps and there went out the king of sodom and the king of gomorrah and the king of admah and the king of the bulla and the king of bela the same is zoar and they joined battle with them in the Vale of Siddim so this is absolute chaos and mayhem in the lowest place it's hell essentially with cheddar loam or the king of the lamb and with tidal king of nations and amraphel king of shinar arioch king of ellasar four kings with five and the Vale of Siddim was full of slime pits low in hell like with war isn't enough they had to throw the slime pits in there apparently around the Dead Sea there are pits of bitumen like the like the tar pits in near LA and so that this seems to actually be historically accurate and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled and fell there and then that remain fled to the mountain and they took their Goods and they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their victuals and went their way and they took lot Abrams brothers son who dwelt and sought him and his Goods and departed so Abram has a family member who falls into the lowest place and there came one that had escaped and told Abram the Hebrew for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite brother of his skull and brother of a nur and these were confederate with abram and the neighbor him heard that his brother was taken captive he armed his trained servants born in his own house 318 and pursued them unto down well so now we also know that Abraham's a pretty brave guy right he gets word that this horrible war has broken out in the worst of all possible places and that his nephew is involved and the first thing he does is you know mount up his posse and get the hell in there and rescue his nephew so Abraham's oh whatever goodness is from the Old Testament perspective it isn't harmlessness right it isn't emasculation and castration it's not that it's not weakness it's not the inability to fight none of that is associated with virtue it's a sort of strength that enables someone to mount an armed team of 300 people when he finds out that his nephew is being kidnapped in a terrible war and to get the hell out there and take them back and so that's it that's a that's a that's a call to - it's a call to power that not know a kind of peaceful meekness that's funny too because you know there's a line in the New Testament the meek shall inherit the earth I got a look at my phone for a sec here I don't know what time it is there's a line in the New Testament that says and send the Sermon on the Mount says the meek shall inherit the earth and that I read that line always bothered me I thought no way that's not that that's not right meat can't be the right word so when I was doing this story of Noah and talking about the Sermon on the Mount I spent a bunch of time looking at commentaries on that line looking at the roots you know the Greek roots and the Hebrew roots and trying to figure out what that meant and in meat does not mean meat that's wrong here's what it means those who have weapons and know how to use them but still keep the machine will inherit the earth Jesus that's a lot different man it's a lot better right because the way it's normally it's normally interpreted is if you're so weak that you're harmless then things will go well for you it's like no that's not right that's and that's not that can't be right it doesn't fit with the narrative it certainly doesn't fit with this narrative and he divided himself against them he and his servants by night and smote them and pursued them unto Hoba which is on the left side of Damascus and he brought back all the goods and his brother lot and his Goods and the women also and the people did work Abraham and the kings of Sodom went out to meet him after his return at the slaughter of charrid Aloma and of the kings that there were there with him at the valley of shaveh which is the Kings Dale and Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine and he was the priest of the Most High God and He blessed him and said blessed be Abram of the Most High God possessor of heaven and earth and blessed be the Most High God which had delivered thine enemies into thine hand and gave him tithes of all and the king of Sodom said to Abram give me the persons and take thy goods to thyself this is that that were the goods that Abram that they'd been rescued of the Kings and Abram said to the king of Sodom I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord what does that mean it means I've made a vow that's what it means that that's what that phrase means I've made a vow to God the possessor of heaven and earth that I will not take anything from a thread even to a shoelace I won't take anything that's yours lest you should say I've made abram rich I'll take only that which my young men Avedon and the portion of men that went with me and inner s : ma'am let them take their portion and so Abraham decides here he's made this immense sacrifice and done this incredibly brave act and rescued his nephew and rescued the king's goods and and they offer him a reward and he says I'm not going to take the reward and the reason for that is that he doesn't want to contaminate the ethical purity of his actions he doesn't want to be paid he doesn't want it he doesn't want to benefit from doing he doesn't want to avoid some what is it exactly he doesn't want to benefit inappropriately from doing the right thing it's something like that and so it's another testament to his character in a very complex Testament right because he's not a sin he's not a good man in any simple sense I mean look what's just happened he's he's mounted and armed he's mounted and armed he's he's led an army into battle and parked in and participated in the slaughter he refuses to benefit from it except to get back what was his that's it he refuses to benefit from it except to get back what was rightfully his and in that way he maintains his covenant with God even to a shul a chit I anything though never so smaller mean less thou should claim a share with God in the honor due to him this is from Matthew pool who was an English nonconformist theologian commenting on that line even to a shoe latchet ie anything though never so meaner small lest thou should claim a share with God in the honor due to him to his blessing alone I do and I will all my riches or lest thou should say Abram is enriched with my spoils and however he pretended kindness and charity yet indeed it was his covetousness that put him upon this work after these things the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision saying fear not Abram I'm nice shield and I exceedingly and I exceeding great reward a vision issue again well we went through that last week fear not Abram I am thy shield and my exceeding great reward and Abram said Lord God what can you give me seeing as I'm childless toddlers and that's the only thing that matters to a broom at this point and the steward of my house is this an easier of dem Damascus no kin and Abraham said Abram said Behold to me thou has given no seed and lo one born in my house is mine heir and behold the word of the Lord came unto him saying this shall not be thine heir but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels should be nine hair so he gets promised the impossible once again and he brought him forth abroad and said now look towards the heaven until the stars if thou be able to number them and he said unto him so shall thy seed be and he believed in the Lord and counted to him for righteousness seeing that this is a covenant idea this belief because here's the belief it's the willingness to act as if the world is constructed so that if you do the right thing the best possible outcome will occur it's a decision that's the Covenant right it's a decision about how to live in the world because the evidence can't be there before you make the decision right and so you might hedge your best you know when when Christ comes back in the book of Revelation to judge people because it comes back as a judge and virtually everyone gets cast out with the chaff and not saved with the wheat huh he says something very interesting he appears in a vision with a sword coming out of his mouth it's a horrifying vision and he divides the the he divides humanity into the Damned and the save or the dead yes the Damned and the saved he says something very interesting he says to those who were neither hot nor cold I will spew you out of my mouth and and it's a it's a disgust metaphor right and what it says is that the word punishment isn't waiting for those who committed to something and did wrong the worst punishment is reserved for those who committed to nothing and stayed on the fence and that's really something too that's really something to think about and it's also something I believe to be true because I see that stasis is utterly destructive because there's no progress all there is is movement backwards there's aging and suffering and no progress and so did not commit to anything is the worst of all transgressions to commit means to put your body and soul into something to offer your life as a sacrifice means that you're willing to make a bargain with fate and the bargain is I'm going to act as if I give it my all then the best possible thing will happen because of that and to to not see the analogy between that and the the active faith in God is to misunderstand the story completely and it has to be an act of faith because how are you going to know you can look at other people but that isn't going to do it it's at Kierkegaard was very clear about this sort of thing there's certain sorts of truths that you can only learn for yourself through experience and that's of course why Abram also has to go out alone right he has to leave this kenneth's it's an individual it's the individuation process like dying it's something that you do alone there's no way you can tell what is within your grasp let's say unless you make the ultimate sacrifice and there's no way of finding out without actually making it and so that's the sacrificial act right that's that's really active Abram being called upon to sacrifice Isaac and think about that is Abram he's been doing he's been like breaking himself into pieces trying to progress forward through starvation and tyranny and war and deceit and the potential loss of his wife and child lessness and like everything that can really befall you in some sense and finally God grants him Isaac when he's old it's impossible he gets Isaac his son and then what has got to do next is say well you know that son that you've been waiting for so for so long it's like I'd like to see just exactly what you're made of I think you should offer him up as a sacrifice and I mean it's a very barbaric story in a sense and maybe in more than just a sense but Abraham does maintain his covenant he's willing to make the sacrifice he's made willing to make this is the thing he's willing to make whatever sacrifice is necessary to keep his covenant with God intact and that's that and that's the decision well maybe it's no surprise that people don't do that and he believed in the Lord and he counted it to him for righteousness and he said unto him I am the Lord that brought thee out of ur of the Chaldees to give this land to you to inherit it and he said Lord God whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it and he said to him this is a sacrificial story again taking a heifer of three years and a goat of three years in RAM of three years in a Turtledove and a young pigeon it's fairly specific actually and he took all these and divided them and laid each piece one against another but the birds divided he not now there's a reason for that and I don't know the reason for it and when the fowls came down upon the carcasses Abram drove them away and when the Sun was going down a deep sleep fell upon Abram and lo a horror of great darkness fell upon him how did it mean he was afraid of the dark which is what I thought it meant when I first read it it isn't what it means it means that he fell into a trance or something like that and then he was enveloped by absolute horror so that's how this story begins and here's the commentary from Joseph Benson who was an English Methodist minister who lived in 1749 it was born in 1749 and when the Sun was going down about the time of the evening evening oblation the washing for he abode by them praying and waiting till toward evening a deep sleep fell upon Abram this was not a common sleep through weariness or carelessness and what a sloop is that's supposed to be sleep not a common sleep through weariness or carelessness but a divine ecstasy that being wholly taken off from things sensible he might be wholly taken up with the contemplation of things spiritual well it really makes you wonder what Abraham was up to in his campsite so he was participating in something that enabled this experience and Lola or a horror of great darkness fell upon him this was designed to strike upon the spirit of Abram and to possess him with the holy reverence holy fear prepares the soul for holy joy God humbles first and then lifts up echoes of psychedelic experience and he said unto Abram know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs and shall serve them and they shall afflict them for hundred years and also that nation whom they shall serve I will judge and afterwards shall they come out with great substance and thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace thou shalt be buried in a good old age but in the fourth generation they shall come hither again to the iniquity of the amorite is not yet full commentaries of Joseph Benson once again they shall come hither again hither to the land of Canaan wherein thou not art thou art the reason why they must not have the land of promise in possession until the fourth generation is because the iniquity of the ammonites was not yet full the righteous God has desert determined that the amorite shall not be cut off till they arrived at such a pitch of wickedness and therefore till it come to that the seed of Abraham must be kept out of possession so the interpretation of the story essentially is that Abraham's descendants will end up enslaved in Egypt for a long lengthy period of time and eventually come back to the land of Canaan and it's interesting to because this is part of Abraham's bargain with God and in this divine vision I mean he's been promised everything but it's a pretty tough bargain because you know when God is pushed or reveals himself let's say he says look you're going to get your damned descendants you know but it's not going to be it's it's it's going to be a tough journey they're going to be slain slaved for a very long time and eventually come back and you won't see it you'll be dead long before then and so it's a realistic promise in a sense and you might say well Abram is so desperate to keep the faith that he's willing to read good into what isn't good but I think I think I don't think that's the right way to look at it I think the right way to look at it is the people who wrote these stories were very realistic and they knew that even if things turned out well for you I mean we're still going to be real you know we're going to be some fantasy it's like let's say you have a family that flourishes is people are still going to die they're still going to get sick they're they're still going to have they're still going to be alive you know with all of its suffering but it'll be the but it'll be a life that's rich enough and complete enough so that it'll justify its its nature essentially and so and it came to pass that when the Sun went down and it was dark behold a smoking furnace and a burning lamp that passed between the pieces Albert Barnes American theologian commented on this the oven of smoke and lamp of flame symbolized the smoke of destruction in the light of salvation they're passing passing through the pieces of the sacrificial victims and probably consuming them as an accepted sacrifice or the ratification of the Covenant on the part of God as the dividing and presenting of them were on the part of Abram in the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram saying unto thy seed I haven't given this land from the river of Egypt unto the great river the river Euphrates the key nights and the Kehna sites and the Cadman nights etc now Sarai Abrams wife bear him no children and she had a handmaid wait a second I think we'll stop there I'm tiring out and it's just at its 929 so that's a very good place to stop so yes so so I should I should close properly and just sum up so what happens here is that that Abram enters into a covenant with God to act in the world and the action is an adventure story essentially and the adventures repeat and they're and they're punctuated by success and sacrifice and re contemplation right and so it's this it's this journey it's the it's the hero's journey uphill I'm here there's a crisis I collapse i reconstruct myself to a higher place and life is like that continually and that's the story of Abram and that's all contained though it's all contained and this is the thing that's so cool because that is what your life is going to be like whether you plan out your life or not it's going to be punctuated like that maybe it won't go up maybe it'll go down the question is what sort of container of you need to be in in order to tolerate movement up and down and that's what the story of Abraham provides it provides a it provides a description of the Covenant that's like the Ark the Covenant in the Ark are the same thing right except the Covenant is the psychological equivalent of the ark and the Covenant is have faith in the structure of existence and go forth that's the Covenant and that and the story is that's the best possible solution that you have at hand all right so I'm going to make a request with regards to the questions which may mean you have to reorient yourself in the line I would like the first two questions on each side if possible to relate specifically to tonight's lecture and then I can and then I can address more general issues if that's if that's okay so and I again I would like you to carefully speak into the mic so that the people who are watching can hear can you hear me yeah I can I the story about Abraham as saying his wife was his sister you referred to that as him making a mistake I'm not quite sure I understand how you're reading that as a mistake seeing as it was a very deliberate decision and it had a pretty good outcome for him and he does the same thing a few chapters later yes this is true you see I don't I don't I don't feel that I have cracked that part of that story properly now the reason I said it was a mistake is because it's clearly an act of deceit and in it and it does put the Pharaoh in a very awkward position not to mention sir I by the way are sir how do you say that I don't know how to say that sir i sir i it's awry to begin with yes is that right sir I yes okay and then it's Sarah and that so Abram means High King something like that and Abraham means father of the people and Sarai means princess and Sarah means mother of the people it's something I have it exactly right I'll tell you next week but that's part of the name transformation the the it seems to me that at least in part it's an indication of Abraham's willingness to use a suboptimal solution when driven to it by necessity I don't think it's a heroic act to pretend that your wife is your sister now you know and and and maybe you might say well under the circumstances there was nothing else he could have done but it does seem it I can't see how you can interpret it other than as a departure from the truth but I know that that's not all there is to it and it does seem to work out well for him and my interpretation is that well if you're oriented properly in the world the grace of God allows you a few necessary mistake something like that you have an alternative idea well why not what what is it about that that because it's Abraham and it isn't reasonable to attribute mistakes to him or what is it because at least I think it says in the text that he's looking to get out of a bad situation and he does whatever is the best thing that's available to him and not to mention as I said he does the same trick a few chapters later yeah well maybe maybe it is the case that you know it's like a white lie issue you know you say well it's a white lie acceptable I would say well the best that you can come up with is acceptable that that doesn't mean it's it's optimal though right like I I'll give you a foolish example because it's the best that I could do at the moment but you know if you if you have a loved one who says does this dress make me look fat the answer to that question is I don't answer questions like that that's the answer right because the other answer is the white lie I mean at least in this context and that means that on the one hand you're maintaining the positive contract between you and the person who's asking the question but then you're still sacrificing the truth within that so your your you're maintaining your relationship with the higher order truth but sacrificing a lower order truth and that would be better than the reverse but it's not as good as not sacrificing the truth at all and I would say that if you're maybe fortunate because sometimes it's a matter because you can be in a situation where all your choices are bad I've seen people in situations like that I've probably been in situations like that and maybe that is what's happening in that stories every choice Abraham is in front of him is bad but I can't help but think that it's more than that it means that if you're doing the best you can and it's not perfect it can still be good enough that's how it looks to me thank you hello dr. Peterson you mentioned earlier there's been a pervasive problem of nihilism and moral relativism and that that kind of be cured with a nice naive optimism that's grounded in fact and what can actually be done to improve situations is there a way to communicate that message to a younger audience say teenagers in a high school environment which is nowadays a hotbed for this kind of nihilistic morally relativist thinking great I'm glad you asked that so I'm going to tell you I was thinking about saying this at the beginning but I decided not to but now I get to say it because I got this question so that's so cool um I I have plans and so his plan number one I have worked with some people to design a website that will enable high university students to enter their course descriptions their professors name the sub discipline and the university and an artificial intelligence agent will tell them if the course is postmodern neo-marxist indoctrination not not only and I have made tentative arrangements with someone to finance a advertising campaign for that site and so the goal is well to inform the consumer do you want to be educated or do you want to be indoctrinated and happily you'll be able to use the site equally for both purposes right because if you want to if you want to take the the the courses that I would regard as into oxidation then this will give you a way of ensuring that nothing that you get exposed to won't be of that sort so and then I'm going to make a video to introduce that to university students and their parents and I'm going to outline what I think the universities are doing wrong is about 20 things they're doing wrong and and there's seriously wrong things and I'm going to start by describing the utility of a university education in humanities education because the humanities education makes you into the kind of autonomous individual that can go away from that can be independent and can communicate and think and that has immense economic value not not just spiritual value and cultural value but economic value and so there's I don't want to tell people not to go to university I want to tell them to go to university and grow the hell up and and learn to communicate and think and I want them to avoid the people who will take the spirit away from them and so that's what that website is going to do I hope and the goal is to drop the enrollment in the indoctrination courses across the english-speaking world by 75% within five years that's the goal so and then you ask that you ask more specifically about high school students well we have this future authoring program that has been used for university students and it produces about a 30% improvement in retention and we've tested several thousand University students anyone can use it by the way it's not for university students but it was easy for us to test it's beneficial impact even if people only spend under 90 minutes on it it still has approximately that effect especially on young men especially if they're ethnic minorities especially if they're not oriented towards a career and didn't do very well in school and so that's really cool because it's really hard to design a psychological intervention that helps the people who are doing the worst most psychological interventions so imagine there are people who are doing not so well and people who are doing well and you produce a psychological intervention what usually happens is the people who are doing well benefit even more right but this seems to work for the disenfranchised so we're thrilled about that really and so we produced a version for high school students yes and so but we don't have them look three to five years out into the future because they can't and they don't know enough you know it's hard for fully mature adults to look that far into the future high school kids can probably manage three to six months and so we're going to have them concentrate on character development and and what they want for their from their friendships and how they would like to orient themselves in school and to start thinking about the sorts of person that they would like to be and that never happens in schools weirdly enough there's a guy named John Gatto who won the Teacher of the Year award in New York City and then in New York State and then stopped being a teacher by the way he wrote a series of books about the education system that explained why students in pre-university education aren't taught to be autonomous individuals it's very interesting what he's discovered historically but anyways we're going to market that probably to parents and to university students themselves rather than to the schools because our experience has been that producing this sort of material directly for individuals works much better it's much more efficient and so then students will be able to or their parents will be able to purchase the program and the students will be able to use it to design their own personality in a manner that would make them thrilled to be alive let's say that would be the goal right yes I'm gonna get you to turn it to put it down a little more heed excellent perfect yes yes yeah and I think I specially the literature in developmental psychology I think bears this out but I think a huge part of learning is interaction and discourse and that seems very difficult in an online setting even if it's through text I don't I don't quite see it it's the same thing and additionally I think there's a huge motivational factor that's difficult to arm it's difficult to keep motivated when you're isolated and nobody else around you is pursuing the same goal so how would you dress though you're absolutely right on both counts um I would say that the idea of an online humanities university is grandiose and it may not be possible and the reason for that is that and as you're alluding to we actually don't understand what the university is we think it's lectures and exams but it's probably not it's certainly being together with people of your own age as you start your life it's moving away from your household it's establishing yourself as a credible intellect right it's it's picking a new group of peers it's all of those things and it isn't clear how that can be replicated online now the people that I'm talking to are sophisticated enough to understand Marshall McLuhan's dictum that the medium is the message and so I think it would be a mistake to attempt to duplicate the University online because you can't but so what we're concentrating on right now is not so much content but infrastructure the question is we want to set up an educated education online that will be autonomously self-governing and self-improving and the content in some sense were not so much interested in the Khan and as we are interested in the process by which people who generate good content might be optimally rewarded and that's what we want to get right and that's probably a discussion that'll take a year or two years to to flesh out we started to conceptualize what the system might look like but but to your point it isn't we're not taking lectures and putting them online although obviously that's what I'm doing that that isn't going to make an online humanities University and we know that I think everything you said is exactly is it's very accurate and also indicative of the high probability that something like this would sail so but well you know where we're going to try to be aware of the pitfalls we're also going to I read this great book I would recommend this book it's a very funny book by a guy named John gall it's called system antics and it's a cult classic systematics and it's about how systems really work and how they fail and it's a work of ironic comedy but it's quite brilliant and one of the things when one line he needs it's made of a bunch of axioms and here's one axiom I just love this is the system does not do what its name says it does and so one guy worked in Alberta Social Services when I was a kid about eighteen or so and I worked as a consultant and I one of the and I got involved in projects that were above my pay grade I would say and I learned a lot about how how large bureaucracies functioned and I was asked at one point to update a report that had been made the year before about what percentage of the spending of the Social Services Department actually went to the recipients of welfare and and social aid in general and the answer was the system did not know and could not find out and they had hired a very expensive consulting firm to answer that question the year before and I was asked to update it which was quite odd to begin with but then I did I went and looked at the consulting report and I went into the data and what I found was that none of it was real but even more importantly there was no way of knowing whether it was true or false because the system had never been set up to calculate what percentage of its total spending actually went to the recipients of social aid it just blew me away and then I thought and I was reading this book at the same time and I thought oh the purpose of the social services department is to employ people in the social services department and I mean I wasn't being cynical about that it's like charity most charities you know it's like 90% overhead so what is the charity do it runs itself now you don't want to be cynical about that because big businesses are the same most like even if they're running at a profit the profit is like five percent so the business spends 95% of its time maintaining itself you know and it makes a bit of product and it makes a bit of profit but most of what it does is maintain itself so anyways one of the axioms in that book that was one of them is the system does not do what it says it does so that's then you can face the system with a clear head and say okay well this thing isn't doing what it says it's doing but it's probably doing something and the thing it's doing might be useful but we should figure out what that thing is so that's been really useful to me as a guide to thinking the other thing he said was if you want to build a big system that works start with by building a small system that works and scale it and we've done that for example with the self authoring programs you know has built small scale systems that are very robust with the hope that they'll scale and that's the same we'll do the same thing here is start with a small amount of content see if we can reward see what I would like to have happen is you know there's a lot of people out there who are pretty intensely educated and some of them are really creative and so imagine that there's a timeline imagine you could do a humanity since you imagine there's a timeline say of a thousand years but scalable then imagine that that there would be lectures associated with the timeline at different levels of resolution so we might call for a lecture on the 3rd century AD what happened in the 3rd century ad you've got half an hour to explain it you can explain it any way you want you can use animation you can use lecture you can use text you can make a movie we don't care what you have to do is that's the topic that's the timespan that's the amount of time and then you can post it and so we could generate content that way and let people experiment and then we can have people review the content as part of their generate questions about the content as part of their assignments rate the questions as part of their assignments and rate the content and then if we charge people imagine you had to pay $50 a month to enroll something like that maybe we would allow you when you first enroll maybe you get to use five dollars of it as disposable income you can reward that to any creator you want but as you progress through the courses your right to determine where your money goes would increase as you became more and more educated hopefully that way we would get some quality control built into it so those are some of the ideas that were that we're starting to play around with so the only one I'm consider about is the motivation yeah what's that the motivation issue for individuals well then I'm not going to go into that because it would take too long but but rest assured that we are thinking about that very hard as well we're going to build competition into it we're going to build cooperation into it we hope to build peer into relationships into it I think all that's possible but but complex right because it's we don't know how to build an online education system really and but it would be fun to experiment and see if we can figure out how to do it so thank you hi so I I couldn't really zero in on any particular question so it's more of a family questions that I have about the nature and cultivation of conscience which was in a sense what this story exemplified about Abraham why do you say that why do you think that the story exemplified the development of conscience of conscience specifically well going back to the zigzag yeah right and the star how you have to keep okay so that's what you were referring to okay orienting yourself completely autonomously yeah on your own terms right yeah okay okay so you we hit on some great there I think you know and this is something weirdly enough that I learned most particularly from the Pinocchio movie which I spent a lot of time studying is because in in the Pinocchio movie Jiminy Cricket is an avatar of Christ essentially but it's very because he's a bug that's the first thing that's kind of weird and because Jiminy Cricket is southern US slang for Jesus Christ among other things but and these things get aggregated in in great mythic dramas like that and that's a great mythic drama but you know one of the things that really makes Jiminy Cricket different from Christ apart from the fact that Christ wasn't a cricket is that Craig the cricket learns as he progresses right even though he's the conscience and so you'd think that he would be the infallible guide that isn't how the moviemakers set it up but not so cool is that he is just as muddle-headed as Pinocchio at the beginning and he's a bit arrogant and puffed up too and so it took me a long time to think that through and then I realized that well you you have the voice of you have the voice of culture in you you have the voice of culture within you but it's old and dead and out-of-date and it's not fully articulated and updated and then what happens is that if you enter into a dialogue with it and you hammer yourself against the world then you get hammered into shape and so does your conscience and so you both become elevated and so well so anyways I think that's that's ridiculously cool because it means that your conscience you don't have an infallible guide but you have something within you that you could build into an infallible guide if you cooperated with it and and said it so well so I think that's very interesting so that being said yes the picture that I have in my mind of the cultivation of virtue in general it's kind of like taking a block of wood and trying to carve out a sphere out of it it'll never be perfectly round but the more you carve right the rounder and rounder right that's successive approximation yeah well one of it's also like what do you call that compound interest this is one of the things that's also and I think this puts you on the to those who more shall be given part of the curve it's like you know you don't have to improve yourself very much each week to really improve yourself on the ridiculous amount in a year you know so you could make you could you could you could Wow make your day 1/100 of a percent better than the day before not would do the trick if you were if you were constant about that that would do the trick so that that's this successive approximation is you don't want to underestimate the utility of incremental progress man it's really kids deadly powerful so so let's say you get to the you know the higher ends of the curve right you're like a pretty virtuous person let's say you even become a sage or something of the sort and I mean one should you doubt your conscience like what are things that we should watch out for even when we got great well that's yep okay um just just to get it out of the way right yeah I don't know how much this relates well it does relate but Psychopaths for example the entire idea that they lack a conscience and that's why right that's what psychopathy is whether or not you agree with that definition right but there's an issue of conscience again a play with psychopathy how can we the first question doubt ourselves in a way that's warranted right regardless of how virtuous we've become and can you treat a psychopath could they call fate a conscience okay so let we'll start with the first one part of the reason that that I believe that freedom of speech is the canonical right let's end obligation right more importantly even obligation is that that's how you figure out if you're wrong you know because so I said home and I think and I think and I think let's say but I'm like who am I to think there's so many things I don't know that it's it's just there's the what I know compared to what I don't know is so miniscule that it's a preposterous act just to say something okay so so no matter how much I sit at home and think I'm not going to fix that I'm going to be flat and then I have biases but my temperament and I have biases because of my malevolence and I have biases because of my my gender my sex let's say since we're not so fond of that word so Eva no matter how much I said home and think I'm still going to be wrong and malevolent so then what do I have to do is I have to talk to some other people and I have to say this is what I think and it's going to be ugly you know because what the hell do I know but then if I listen people will tell me why I'm wrong and lots of people have been telling me why I'm wrong like a lot and it's hard you know it's hard but it's but I've learned something from it like I had this revelation let's say about being yelled at by your father now I know that you can be yelled at too much by your father but it's like you're wrong man and so someone's yelling at you and maybe they're only ten percent right but if you shut the hell up and listen then you can figure out where you're wrong and then maybe you can be thankful for that and then maybe if you shut up and listen your father would quit yelling at you you know because he's wrong - what the hell does he know he knows how to yell at you and tell you how you're wrong and he's throwing things out you add you that are probably not true but some of its true and you know if someone can tell you why you're wrong they've given you a great gift because then you don't have to be wrong anymore and you might think well who cares if you're wrong but you know there's a line in the New Testament - is if the blind lead the blind won't they fall in won't they fall into a ditch the answer to that question by the way is yes they will and so the reason that you want to think is because thinking is how you like when you think you creative the fictional world that's an analog of the world and then you make an avatar of yourself to act in that world and then if the Avatar dies you don't act out those actions right well so if you think properly then you don't have to suffer and die and so if you can say what you think and people can tell you why you're wrong and you know to say what you think under extreme circumstances means that you're going to say things that no one wants to hear because those are the things you don't know about those are the things that are conflictual and differ called it are going to be hard conversations man and you're going to be wrong about them a lot if you don't get to stumble forward with your stupidity then you can't be corrected and so so there's no distinction between free speech and thinking and there's no distinction between thinking and thriving and so those who want to inhibit free speech do not wish for people to thrive and I believe that so thinking does not happen inside your head that's only the beginnings of thinking and it's this that we're doing here that's thinking you know so we have to protect that psychopath I don't I say this I hope non naively also having dealt with Psychopaths in my clinical practice and I would say now and then in my life I don't believe in Psychopaths I don't believe that we know enough to say there are people born without conscience um I don't think the psychometric measurement of psychopathy is everything that it should be I've been trying to model it bei in the Big Five domain I think now it's complicated because so I would say a psychopath the classic psychopath is likely extroverted especially assertive disagreeable and unconscious and maybe extremely low in neuroticism so you can't frighten them but so that's a rare combination because it's extreme on many traits right but that I don't believe that that means that someone with that personality configuration is doomed from birth to a pathological existence because there's things about psychopathy that that the that the classifiers those who claim like correctly that the psychopath is born in some sense can't explain it's like well what about the cruelty there seems to be a motive they're you know they're passionless and they lack no they lack emotion well why are they cruel then for entertainment well but then you have to explain the entertainment motivation like there's a failure in some sense with the classic psychopathy theorist to come to grips with the problem malevolence it skirted over and you can't do that if you're talking about psychopathy it's like malevolence is the bloody issue here and so the other issue with the psychopaths is that he's irredeemable right that's the idea I don't think we know enough to make such claims now and that doesn't I know the psych office a literature quite well and I have great respect for their primary research is in the field I want to make that perfectly clear but we're talking at a different we're talking we're approaching the problem from a different level of analysis here something like a spiritual level of analysis and I don't think that there's an easy easy translation from the descriptive psychometric psychiatric approach to the spiritual level they don't match and I'm more likely to say let's not assume the soul is doomed from birth right and I'm loathe to think that there are people born irredeemable although I do think there are irredeemable people know the death penalty issues interesting in that regard you know because I've read a lot about really terrible people and I've also read a lot about what really terrible people said about themselves and many of them wished for the death penalty and so it's absolutely clear that there are things that you can do that deserve the death penalty but that doesn't mean that the state should have the right to impose it that's a different question so yep in the previous lecture you mentioned the 2008 economic crisis and one of the very interesting themes that's emerged at many levels be at universities or economic policies this perceived culture war specifically the idea of Marx versus milk and you've criticized postmodern the neo-marxist thought very frequently one interesting critic of the policies of the EU specifically EC ECB and IMF during the Greek debt crisis was Yanis varoufakis the former greek Finance Minister and his criticism of MIL was deal was Mills alleged contempt for the population and verify his comments on the type of capitalism that results in too big to fail he describes themselves as an erratic Marxist to me personally is an example of someone whose position on the philosophical mooring of policy is interesting to compare and contrast with yours he certainly not your typical Marxist or post modernist even though not really sure what that means but if you look at his work during the Greek debt crisis and his current work with diem25 he seems to be well reasoned well-positioned and and articulate now I wanted to know if you had an opinion on that type of criticism of MIL or his taking of a position as a neurotic Marxist okay I would say I would say no to the specifics of the question I don't think that I have that detailed expertise in order to answer the question at the level of analysis that you where you formulated it but I have something to say that's more general about the set of phenomena that you described there's no doubt that distribution is a major problem that capitalism contends with imperfectly at best and the distribution problem is the pre de distribution problem right and it's something that Marx commented on which mostly in the monetary sphere is that money tends to accumulate in the hands of very few people it's like there's no doubt about that now as we've discussed before the people in whom hands the money accumulates do turnover more than people say think especially in in countries that are functioning me reasonably well and it's really important that that happens yes yes yes but that doesn't that doesn't solve the problem of the fact that produced goods gravitate towards an extreme minority now they're also produced often by extreme minority which is also a problem I would say then that the idea that capitalism is more prone to that distribution problem than any other system I don't believe that to have been demonstrated at all and I think that capitalism is actually pretty good at self-destruction except when that's interfered with and I think that's particularly the case in the United States where generally the policy has been if you're an idle with feet of clay no matter how big you are you get to fail now that's being compromised severely in the last 20 years and we're probably going to pay for that I think they really paid for that in Japan right where there is every attempt to prop out that the gods that should have died so so fair enough for the critique of capitalism that's not the issue the issue is do you have a better idea and if the idea is well we could kind of do it marks suggested then you don't get to have that position and claim what should I say I haven't seen any evidence that systems predicated on that set of actions have done anything but more harm than good thank you yeah and when will you be announcing the monthly extension to the circuses as soon as I find out whether or not I can rent this theater in the fall yeah thank you we'll see you next week you Hello, everyone. It's been a very strange day so I'm going to tell you about what happened and then I'll start the lecture. So, I got up this morning and started to put my day together and then I tried to sign into my gmail account and it said that it had been disabled because I violated the terms of service with Gmail and I thought, well I didn't violate any Terms of Service that I know of. Now, I set up a new YouTube channel yesterday called Jordan B Peterson Clips and we made some technical changes and I thought maybe it had something to do with that. I had been shut out of Google one other time, years ago. When you get shut out like that there's a little form you can fill out and so I filled out the form and I said that I had been shut out and that I didn't know why and I sent it off. Then I realized one of my staff members called me and said that she was locked out of the YouTube account and I thought, oh yeah the YouTube account is hooked to the Gmail account, so that meant that I couldn't get access to any of my youtube videos. They were still up and online but I couldn't get access to them I couldn't post last week's biblical lecture for her for example. So that was worrisome and made me suspicious and then about two hours later I got an email from Google and they said that they had reviewed my request to be reinstated and that I had violated Google's Terms of Service and they weren't going to turn my account back on. They didn't say why, they didn't say anything. There was no warning whatsoever about any of this, they didn't tell me why and they didn't say why in the email response. So, I wrote them back, because they said I could. I wrote them back and I said, "This might not be a good idea", basically. And "You might want to think about it". my son emailed me and he said, "Look you should hold off, because maybe there's still a mistake here" and I thought "Yeah there might be, it might be just a mistake". But, then why in the world did I email Google and they contacted me and they said they would not reinstate it and they didn't provide me with any information. So, I contacted the other journalists and I said well you never know maybe this is just a mistake so let's hold off. Then about half an hour later while I was trying to get into my I use this AdWords account that's linked to Google, I don't run ads on my videos but I need the AdWords account because it helps me add some little gadgets to the videos that I wouldn't otherwise be able to  and I was always playing with that the system came back online. I thought, "Well that's interesting". And lots of people had emailed me and twittered me, some people within Google and some people elsewhere, and they were doing whatever they were going to do to help me get all this material back up and running. So, something worked. My suspicions are that what worked was the publicity. Now so but maybe not you know and it's very weird being in this situation because there has been a number of recent episodes where these larger companies Facebook, Google, Patreon not that it's a massive company but it's starting to become reasonably significant have decided on rather arbitrary grounds to shut down their users and this is very ominous to me partly because we've we've turned our communications over to very large systems or very large systems have emerged to mediate our communication right I mean there's lots of benefit to it so you don't want to get too cynical about it but we're blind with regards to the policies that regulate the the actions the regulatory actions of these large organizations and that's really a bad thing and something else is even more ominous really ominous you know it's highly probable that we're going to build political elder rhythms into our artificial intelligence and this sort of thing will be regulated by machines that no one understands and that's a really bad idea and that's a really likely possibility so anyways I was all confused about this I thought Jesus maybe I flew off the handle you know because I was sort of it was stressful man you know because I have like a hundred and fifty thousand emails in that account like that's a lot of emails and it's all my correspondence for the last 10 years you know so it's an archive as well as an ongoing email system I have a commercial email system that I just set up three weeks ago with like six different email addresses now to try to organize my correspondence so I wasn't completely unable to communicate but my calendar was gone and that's a bloody disaster because like I've got things scheduled out forever and I don't remember what they are I can't even remember what I'm doing in a day so much less than a month but I thought maybe I flew off the handle and I was worried that I contacted journalists too soon and you know but anyways it all worked out so then what happened well just as I was coming to this lecture I stepped outside and there was a little package outside luckily it wasn't a bomb there was a there's a package outside nice little package we looked my wife and I looked inside it there was a couple of bottles of wine in there so that was nice and there was a little note and so I'm going to read you the little note because it's actually pretty interesting so so this person said that they had finally tackled the self authoring suite so they seem to be happy about that but that's not so interesting except peripherally a friend on Twitter has contact with Google engineers she said quote I spoke with some friends inside Google who offered to help and I did get contacted by quite a few people at Google who said that they had been you know watching my lectures and so on and were happy about what I was doing anyways I spoke with some friends inside Google who offered to help but they suggest he set up a back-up plan the teams are feeling significant pressure from advocacy groups and quote I have at least four Google engineers who offered to speak up on his behalf but they know the team dynamics and unfortunately especially YouTube is an SJW cesspool I hope this information is useful to you it's like yeah it's kind of useful alright so that was that was part of what happened today and so anyways I still don't really understand it right because I don't know why it got shut down and I don't know if anything I did got it turned back on and I don't know the reasons for it and that's also rather ominous it seems to me that when I was thinking it through and was that I know I have a fairly what would you call it respectable YouTube following I don't know if you'd necessarily call it respectable it's fairly large YouTube following and it seems to me that it would have been appropriate for Google if they were going to shut down my account to tell me why I would think and also maybe look me up maybe especially after I emailed them and then maybe not to have emailed me back and said no we're not going to reinstate you but we're not going to tell you any reasons they didn't say they wouldn't tell me any reasons they just didn't tell me any reasons and then it also seems very strange to me that it just all of a sudden went back on after two hours and so well so I don't know what to make of that maybe more information will come to light over the next few days I hope that I didn't jump the gun but it's very a very peculiar set of circumstances I thought it was kind of amusing actually that the video that they stopped me from posting today was the last biblical lecture you wouldn't necessarily think that that would be the sort of thing that people would want to stop from being posted but we're in very very strange times so that was my adventure for today and so I didn't you know I hate speakers who apologize to the crowd before they talk to them because you know if you're speaking to people and they put all this effort into coming then you shouldn't tell them what a story and useless creature you are before you talk to them you know and ask for their forbearance and forgiveness it's like it's a little you're late for that but I'm still going to do that a little bit today because you know I wanted to spend all day preparing this lecture I mean I prepared a lot beforehand but that rattled me up a lot and so I didn't prepare as much as I could have anyways we'll stumble forward and see how it goes I I'm I'm reasonably familiar with the stories now and so onward and upward so I'm going to reiterate this you know I've learned something I have this idea that it would be a good idea for young people and older people citizens of the West let's say to learn more about their culture and their civilization right because it's a great civilization and it it's taken a lot of work to put together but I don't think that we really know you know I know a fair bit about it although I wouldn't consider myself nearly as educated as a person should be but I'm not too badly educated and but I tell you going through these biblical lectures verse by verse just makes me even more aware of how unbelievably ignorant I am you know and partly for too two reasons like one is because I've been using this Bible hub calm place and I think I told you last week but I wanted to reiterate it because it's important it's so interesting the way that they've set it up because you can go through the biblical stories verse by verse and then for each verse there's a whole small font page of commentary from multiple sources and so you know not only is the Bible hyperlinked in the way that I discussed in the first lecture with all the verses referring to not all the other verses but lots of them but it's um it's got its tendrils out into literature you know direct commentaries on the text but also although all the literature that's been influenced by it so it's it's it's an unbelievably central and core text and it's so interesting to read a book where every sentence has been commented on what really in volumes and then just to get a sense of that volume of material you know how much power brain power has been put into this and and to also understand how bloody ignorant like I'm so ignorant about this there's all this work and and it seems that we've left it to decay in the dust and it's a big mistake man it's a big mistake because the people who are writing these commentaries like you know a lot of its from the 14th and 15th and 16th century it's kind of archaic and it's and it's some of it's outdated and some of it you wouldn't agree with but if you read all the commentaries side by side you know you get a pretty good blast of wisdom coming at you and like the thing about wisdom is it stops you from running face-first into walls you know it's not just there to to so that you can talk to people at parties about what university you graduated from you know and it's there because the information is unbelievably useful you know one of the things that I realized that I want to return to tonight because I've been thinking a lot about this idea of the arc you know and I think I mentioned to you last week that I'd figured out that there's this idea that Noah was perfect in his generations and that meant that he has said his family in order wasn't just him but he had said his family in order and because of that when when the catastrophe came like it comes to everyone he was able to withstand it because he had the support of the people who were near and dear to him and that's really important when things come along to lay you low like if you're alone and the flood comes it's like man goodbye to you if you've got 10 or 15 people supporting you in a tight Network you know and your your interrelationships with them or pristine and you can tell them the truth and they can tell the truth back to you it's possible that you might be able to find that spin way that will preserve you when when when you know the terrible thing is come knocking at your door and so there's this the idea of the ark is very very concrete in Noah it's actually a structure that that he inhabits you know it's a concretize almost like a child's story and I'm not being cynical about that because there are some bloody brilliant jobs to children's stories but you know it's really concrete eyes but then Abraham comes along and instead of an ark there's a covenant right now it says in the story of Noah that Noah walked with God and and of course Abraham it isn't clear exactly did he's walking with God or before God which we'll get into later but you see I see this as part of the increasing cycle psychologize ation of the sacred ideas that were acted out by archaic people so first of all it's concretize in the form of a ship that actually sustains you when the floods come right it's it's very concrete imagery the sort of thing you might see in a movie but then with Abraham it turns into a psychological covenant in some sense it's like a contractual agreement now it's a contractual agreement between Abraham and God but but that doesn't really matter that I mean obviously it matters but it's that it's only it's only half of what's important about that the other half is that it's a contract and you know one of the things that you do with your ideal let's say is you establish a contract with it you also establish like a social contract with other people right that's what keeps society organized and so there's this idea that emerges in the Abraham stories of a sacred contract and that has the same function as the Ark and what it does because what happens in Abraham we'll see more of this today is that he you know God tells him to go forward into the world and we talked about that last week and he does that the encounters famine and he encounters tyranny and he encounters powerful people who want to take from him what is his I mean god sends about in the world but it's not like he has an easy write of it it isn't easy at all it's as hard as it can be but there's this consistent emphasis in the text and I think it's something really worth attending to that if you maintain your contract which and that has that has to do with honesty and trust and truth and all of those things if you maintain your contract and you have a good possibility the best possible possibility of making your way through the catastrophe in the chaos and I don't want to be naive about this you know when I read young and I started to understand the idea of the hero archetype you know the idea that the human being is a is a force a logo's force that can stand up against chaos and catastrophe and tragedy and evil and prevail I never did think that that meant that if you did stand up and tell the truth that you would necessarily prevail right it's not it's not it's not a magic trick it's your best bet that's the thing you don't have a better option and so and that's what that's what that I see the idea is emerging in in the Abrahamic texts it's like people are figuring this out that would be progressive revelation that's one way of thinking about it and you can think about that religious terms but you can also think about it as humanity consulting itself right each individual talking to themselves which is what we do when we when we think and each individual communicating with every other individual and gathering a body of wisdom that helps people or orient themselves in the toughest conditions and it's an incremental process and I think that I really do believe that that's speaking purely secularly I do believe that that's what manifests itself in the biblical stories right it's the dawning enlightenment of mankind something like that as we start to understand the principles by which we have to live in order to orient ourselves properly in the world so and I also do believe and this is this is the thing that's the unspoken question is like you don't you don't have any idea how rich and fulfilling your life could be despite its tragedy and limitation if you stop the things that you know to be wrong it's a really grand experiment and you know one of the things that God tells Abraham constantly as the story progresses especially every time Abraham makes a sacrifice is God says walk with me and be perfect it's something like that and so the injunction is or aim high establish this relationship with the highest thing that you can conceive of which you might as well do that because well what are you going to do establish a relationship with the most mediocre thing you can conceive of or you're going to establish relationship with the lowest thing you can conceive of people do that and I wouldn't recommend it it's a really bad thing and there's a lot of pain associated with that and maybe you know there's that there's pain that can expand into a world destroying force down that route and there's absolutely no doubt about that so what is there something superstitious and foolish about attempting to establish a contractual relationship with the source of all being I mean I I I just don't see that as a as an erroneous conception and you know it's not necessary perhaps to get lost in the details we can argue forever about what God might or might not be but we could at least say that the concept of God is an embodiment of humanity's highest ideal right we could at least agree on that and then you might say well is that real and the first thing I would say about that is there's a lot of things about the world we don't understand and the second thing I would say is it depends bloody well on what you mean by real that's for sure and that turns out to be a very complicated question so okay so we left Abram remember at the end last time he had just gone off to fight a bunch of kings and get his nephew back which seemed to be a pretty courageous act and so that brought a story to an end and it's interesting I think what happens in the narrative is that there's a story so Abraham is somewhere and he goes somewhere else right that's the story and he has adventures along the way and those adventures are usually the typical kind of adventure which is a risk in the structure of the story and exposure to a kind if chaos and novelty and then a reconstitution of the of the mode of being so that's classic classic story right you are somewhere you're a certain way you're moving forward something happens that you don't expect it blows you into pieces it introduces chaos right you you face the drag and you get the gold or maybe the bloody thing eats you and the story is over and then and then you get to where you're going but then the question is well what happens when you get to where you're going and that's a really important issue because one of the things that happens to people all the time in their life is that they get to where they're going and then they don't know what to do right so for example you graduate from university it's like okay story over who are you now who are you the next day and so so what happens is when you succeed then there's a success crisis and the success crisis is well I've run this story to its end now what and that's exactly what happens in the abrahamic stories and they're punctuated by a period of contemplation and sacrifice so every time an Abrahamic story comes to its end then Abraham makes another sacrifice and commune with God and then he figures out what to do next and that seems that seems right it seems psychologically right because what you should do when your story comes to an end when you've achieved what it is that you want to achieve or perhaps when you're in terribly dire straits but we won't talk about that at the moment when you've achieved what you need to achieve then the next question is okay well now I'm that person or I have that character what what do I need to do next and some of that is always well what do I need to give up now what do I need to let go of so I can move to the next plateau right assume that your life is a hopefully a sequence of upward moving what would you call them it's like Sisyphus except you're actually each time you climb up the mountain you get a little higher on the mountain that's something like that so it's Sisyphus with an optimistic bent and and and maybe if you push the rock up the mountain properly and let it roll down then and if you do that right then it's okay every time you roll it back up it's it's better in some sense I don't think that's unrealistic either and so well Abraham goes and rescues nephew from these two radical kings that's very brave and he doesn't take any reward for it because as far as he's concerned it's just a manifestation of the right thing and then he has another vision after these things that's the battle the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision saying fear not Abram I am the shield and I exceeding great reward and Abram said Lord God what will he'll give me seeing I go childless and the steward of my house is this Aliza air of damascus and abram said Behold to me that was given no seed and lo no one born what one born in my house is mine heir and behold the word of the Lord came to him saying this shall not be thine heir but he that shall come forth out of thine own thine own bowels shall be done here and he brought him forth abroad and he said now look to heaven and tell the stars if you're able to number them number them and he said unto him so shall thy seed be and Abram believed in the Lord and he counted it to him for righteousness and he said unto him I am the Lord that brought thee out of ur of the Chaldees to give this land to you to inherit it and he said Lord God whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it and then he does this sacrifice take me in effort a heifer of three years old and a she-goat and a Rabb and a Turtledove and a young pigeon and then God comes down and well Abraham goes into a trance that's what it appears to be in the story and has a great terror and then God appears to him and I'll just review this commentary again this is from Joseph Benson and when the Sun was going down that's about the time when you wash up for the evening and he's praying and waiting towards evening a deep sleep fell upon Abraham not a common sleep through weariness or carelessness but a divine ecstasy but being wholly taken off from things sensible he might be wholly taken up with the contemplation of things spiritual very strange very very strange series of interpretations because it does seem that what happens to Abraham that he falls into some sort of revelatory trance and so when as I've taken some pains to explain we don't really understand such things and and we can't rule out their existence because there's too much evidence that they do in fact curr perhaps it's a technology that we no longer possess that's one possibility perhaps we no longer know how to access these sorts of states of consciousness it's certainly possible and lo a horror of great darkness fell upon him this was designed to strike upon this spirit of Abram and to possess him with holy reverence holy fear prepares the soul for holy joy God humbles first and then lifts lifts up yeah well I think that's right too like you know one of the experiences I've had in my life fairly commonly their variety of different ways this is especially true when I was paying a lot of attention to my dreams which I did for about 15 years I guess something like that now and then I would feel like I'd learned some things and had sort of consolidated them and then before I went to sleep I'd think okay I'm ready to learn something else it's like and I didn't say that without trepidation and usually because usually when you learn something you know it's not that Pleasant because you usually learn something about why you're wrong and the deeper the thing that you learn the more you learn about why you're wrong and there's a death that's associated with that because then you have to let that part of you that's wrong die and that's that's where that's the sacrifice right and so you have to make a sacrifice you have to be willing to make a sacrifice before you're going to learn something and the and perhaps your what you'll learn is in proportion to your willingness to make a sacrifice and I really do believe that I do believe that as well because I also think that if you commit to something that means that you don't do a bunch of other things right so that's the sacrifice of all those other things you commit to it you set your sights on it if you really commit to it and you get the sacrifice right so to speak then the probability that that thing will be successful vastly increases and I think that that's also not a naive or or a naive way of thinking or a foolish way of thinking I my experience has been that that's the case and so back to the dream I mean I do think that we learn in trepidation and most of the time if you have to be laid low before the new revelation can make it so Manifest and I think that's also what happens to people often in psychedelic experiences when they have a bad trip is they don't get through the bad part of it and maybe that's because there's so much mess in their lives now I'm speculating but it's informed speculation there's so much mess in their lives that the altered state of consciousness makes manifest that it's like a little trip through hell and but the mess is so complete and comprehensive and all-pervading that there's no way they can get through it now if they could get through it and started to sort those things out then you know there would be perhaps what would you call it a compensatory positive revelation at the end but the first thing is if you want to learn something is that you're going to encounter well you have to figure out what's wrong before you you can figure out what wisdom you need next to guide yourself and that's no laughing matter right and so I think that that's what the that's what this refers to I think that's the sort of psychological experience that that refers to I also think we built this a little bit into this into the future authoring program you know I read this really cool paper once reviewed by this guy named Jeffrey gray Jeffrey gray wrote a book called the neural psychology of anxiety man and that is a great book it is impossible to read it took me really it took me like six months to read it and the reason for that is that he reviewed about 3000 papers and they're all neurological papers and heavy psychological / biological papers he actually read them all and he understood them and he synthesized them and then he wrote this book about the synthesis and so he's very very careful with this terminology and so to read the book you have to understand brain anatomy and you have to understand neural pharmacology and you have to end understand animal behavior the whole literature on animal behavior not whole whopping dose of human psychology and cybernetics it's like it's a vicious book but you really learn something when you read it if you go through it by bit like and it's it's had an overwhelming influence on psychology even among people who haven't read it which is most of the people who cite it by the way and so but he said he outlined this real cool study maybe it was a sequence of studies about how to motivate rats you know and rats are a lot like us you know in positive and negative ways and you know biochemically and and psycho pharmacologically they're very very similar and they have very complex social environments and you know they have hierarchies and they play and they laugh Jaak panksepp yok banks have found out that rats laughs if you tickle them you can tickle them with like the end of a pencil eraser but you can't hear them laughing because they laugh ultrasonically like bats so you have to record it and then slow it down then you can hear them giggling away when you tickle them so so which is you know you think oh you spend $50,000 on a study demonstrating that rats laughs and you think well wait a second wait a second that's a major-league study and onto these outline a ludic circuit that's a play circuit and yock banks have discovered the play circuited mammals that's a bloody big deal you know if you get that by like rubbing rats with a pencil eraser well good for you so anyways so Great Auk Talaat about how to motivate a rat and you might have heard about BF Skinner you know he used food pellets to motivate his rats but what you don't know about Skinner is that those rats were starved to 3/4 of their normal body weight so they would they would work for food man so Skinner's rats we're going to oversimplify but you can get that's to work for food they don't have to be that hungry you can get them to work for food and they'll do all sorts of things I'll press levers and and they'll open bar open doors and they'll solve problems and you know they'll do all sorts of things and one of the things you can do to kind of measure how much the rat is motivated let's say you've run him through a maze and he knows there's some food at the end of the maze you can tie a little spring to his tail and see how hard he pulls when you open the door to the maze so that's because that's how much rat work the route is willing to do so you can measure that or you can see how fast these skitters down the maze and you can get an estimate about the rats motivation and so then you might say well how motivated is a hungry rat and the answer would be depends on the hungry is but there's another answer it also depends on what's chasing him when he's going after the food so if you have a rat and you have food over here and you walked in some cat odor rats hate cat odor and it's innate they never have to see or smell a cat to be absolutely petrified by cat odor and so if you walked in some cat odor and then open the door that rat will zoom to that food a lot faster than it will if it's just hungry so a rat running away from something that it doesn't want toward something that it does want is a very motivated rat and so one of the things we did with the future authoring program that's germane to this idea of terror to vision is this idea in the old testament the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom it's a pretty harsh idea but but there's something really useful about it because one of the things you see with people all the time is that they're maybe they're trying to stumble forward towards their ideal as poorly defined as it might be but then they're afraid right they're afraid about what they might encounter and that stops them because fear does stop people it freezes you like a prey on them on so people move ahead but then they get afraid and then they start moving ahead and so and that's not so good because negative emotion is a really powerful motivator so we're more motivated by negative emotion than positive emotion quantitatively speaking quantitative quantitatively speaking you can measure that and that's I think because we can only be so happy but we can really be suffering and yet you know so we have to pay more attention to the negative and that's bad because the negative can stop you and then in my clinical practice you know I often talk to people who are trying to make a difficult life decision and and they are weighing out the costs and the benefits of making the life decision you know and one of the things I always talk to them about is wait a second that's an incomplete analysis you have to weigh out the benefits and the costs of doing this and you have to weigh out the costs and benefits of not doing that not doing it and that's not the same as the zero that you assume that you're starting with right because to not make a decision also have a cost and sometimes the cost of not making a decision it's far worse than the cost of making a decision even if the decision is risky and so one of the things you can derive from that and this is very useful I think is that this is also I think why it's so useful contemplate your mortality so to speak as you're screwed no matter what you do you know and that actually frees you is that you you have half a that has catastrophes and you have paths B that has catastrophes and you don't get to have the no catastrophe path but you get to pick which one and that's really something because if you know that there's terrible risk associated with everything that you do and don't do then you can afford to take some risks because you're not you know then this is all within the arc metaphor I'm still making the case that despite the fact that your life is essentially catastrophic you can you can make a covenant with the highest ideal and that will take you through it the best way possible I'm still making that case so so then you think okay while I'm trying to make this decision I'm going to go try to do something difficult and isn't that terrifying and then you think yeah but wait a minute what's really terrifying is not doing it and then you think about the cost of not doing it so in the future authoring program we have people do this little meditative exercise which is okay just think about your insufficiencies by your own definition right the way that you don't do what you know you should do about the things that you do that you shouldn't do that you know you shouldn't do beyond a shadow of a doubt right there's some things like that and that's bad habits and poor aim and all of resentment and hatred and aggression and unresolved conflicts and all those things that are dementing you and working you and then think okay those things get the upper hand man they get the upper hand and they take you the worst possible place you could go in the next three to five years what exactly does that look like and so you sketch all that out you think hey I don't want to go there and so the next time that a temptation comes up you think well I'd be a lot better for me if I didn't succumb to this temptation it's like that's kind of weak eh you'd look a little better if you didn't eat like a cheesecake a day or something like that you know that's that's something but it's not the same as I'm going to have diabeetus and I'm going to lose my damn leg in in five years if I don't get my eating under control that's motivating and so then the temptation comes along and you think oh how about no seriously how about no not just because a higher good would be obtained if I avoided it but because a terrible catastrophe would be averted if I didn't and so well so you want to get your fear behind you right you want to get it behind you where it's pushing you forward instead of in front of you where it's stopping you and you get your fear behind you pushing your for you forward by actually thinking through the consequences of not putting your life together under the least of those is that you waste it and suffer right because you can suffer anyways man so you waste it and suffer that's a bad deal because maybe if you're going to suffer you could at least do something noble and glorious and upright and powerful and honorable and admirable and helpful and and difficult you know that's just so much better and maybe that's good enough so that you say hey you know little suffering it's basically worth it at least it's up WayForward you know at least it's a way forward and he said unto Abram know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in the land that is not theirs and shall serve those people snail flicked them for 400 years god he's hedging his bets here a lot right he says Abraham will go out you know into the world and then he confronts him with a famine and he confronts him with the charity and with powerful people he wants to take his wife and then he leaves his his nephew and he has a fight with men he has to go fight a war and now you know he's reconstituting this covenant God says yeah you're going to have a nation is going to come from you but they're going to be slaves to tyrants for like four hundred years it's like yeah he's not the great salesman exactly but but the thing about it is that the thing that I like about it is that it's realistic you know and you got to think too because who knows why it is that the Bible exists or why people wrote it but you know if they're going to sell you something I don't know if this is the way to do it you know because unless you're a salesman who sophisticated beyond belief because you'd think that if it was just a matter of controlling the masses let's say which is once a Marxist interpretation of religion or or providing people with a primitive defense against death anxiety which is essentially the Freudian interpretation that you kind of make the deals that God cut with Abraham a little more on the positive and polished side instead of making them a realistic offer constantly like they are that that's also that that that's part of the reason I think it is reasonable to treat the Bible as literature it's more than literature it's something other than literature but you can treat it as literature and I think the reason that you can treat it as literature is because the characters are all complex including the character of God Himself is complex and sophisticated it's not one-sided and it's it's paradoxical and incomprehensible at times but I think good literature is like that because you know true art here's something about true art this is something I learned from young it's so smart it is so smart so imagine that you inhabit the land that you know conceptually and practically and then imagine outside of that there's that massive space of things that you don't know and even outside of that there's the space of things that no one knows right so it's the known territory surrounded by the unknown that's the canonical archetypal landscape and the unknown manifests itself to you and that's where new knowledge comes from but the question is how is that knowledge generated and it doesn't just leap from completely unknown to completely articulate it in one move that isn't how it happens it has to pass through stages of analysis before it becomes articulable and the first stage of analysis as far as I can tell is that you act it out so if something really surprises you the first way that you react to it your category is actually embodied you'd like this that that's your first category it's not conceptual at all it's embodied and then maybe you start to it like you're at home at night and you know something startled seeing you freeze and then it's dark and then your imagination populates the darkness with whatever might be making the noise and that's the sequence it's like embodied response imaginative representation exploration articulation that's how information moves from the unknown to the known and artists are the people who stand on that imagistic frontier and they and they put themselves out into the unknown and they and they they take a piece of it and they and they transform it into some mythological image and they don't know what they're doing exactly because they're guided by their intuition if there all artists otherwise they're just propagandists they have to be contending with something they don't understand and what they do is they make it more understandable you know one and then people gaze at those artworks or they listen to the stories and then they start to become informed by them but they don't know how or why I was at the modern art museum Museum of Art and in New York I'm afraid I don't remember which one unfortunately but I was in this amazing room you know it had all these priceless paintings from the from the late Renaissance hanging in it you know each painting worth who knows a billion dollars maybe they're priceless fading so the room was it's a shrine and it was full of people from all over the world who are looking at these paintings you think but what the hell are these people doing coming to this room looking at these paintings whatever what are they up to one of them was a painting of the Assumption of Mary right brilliantly composed and there rose all these people looking at it I thought what are they doing they don't know what that means like why are they looking at that painting why is it in this room why does it cost a billion dollars why is that painting worth so much and answered that is what we don't really know like it happened there they're sacred objects in some sense we gaze at them in ignorance and wonder and the reason for that is that the unknown shines through the mattes and in partially articulated form and so well that's the role of art and that's the role of artists you know real artists real artists are contending with unknown right and they're possessed by it they have a personality trait openness that makes them do that they can't even help it and I've had lots of creative people in my clinical practice and I can tell you the worst thing for creative people is to not be creative because they just dye it because it's it's it's it's like maybe you're a tree with a few major branches you know that's your personality so if you're extroverted man you can't be cut off from people because you just wither and if you're agreeable you have to be in an intimate relationship or you die you know if you're conscientious man and you get and you're unemployed you're just going to eat yourself up because you have to have a duty and you have to carry a load because you just can't stand it otherwise and open people have to be creative they have to be because otherwise they die they don't have any vitality and so they're cursed with the necessity of putting a foot out into the unknown and making sense of it and then they're also cursed with necessity of trying to make a living while they're doing that which they can't because you can't it's almost impossible to monetize creative creative action as many of you who are creative will no doubt find out it's very very frustrating it's not that creative action is we're without value right because the creative people are entrepreneurs and the creative people revitalize cities and the creative people make things magnificent and beautiful you think about what's happened in Europe over the last thousand years say 2,000 years this amazing unbelievable collaboration to make things so beautiful that they're they're jaw-dropping when you walk into them and you think about the economic value of that right I mean I think it's it's either France or Spain that's the most visited country in the world it's one of those two I think there's more tourists in France than there are people most of the time and part of the reason for that is it's just so damn beautiful you just can't stand it and you think what's the economic value of that it's absolutely incalculable and what's interesting too is that you build that beauty in and then the farther away you get from it in time the more valuable it becomes right instead of decaying it has exactly the opposite effect its value magnifies and one of the things that I'm deeply ashamed of as a Canadian is that our sense of beauty is so underdeveloped we're so primitive it's not even primitive that's the wrong word because you know I know what it is it's it's it's second rate it's second rate at least it's terror to because people are afraid of beauty but the idea that art is the conservatives really have a problem with this in particular because conservative people tend not to be that creative and it's a mysterious turn by temperament it's a mystery to me because they should be concerned with economic development and beauty is so unbelievably crucial to economic development it's just yell voted you you know so anyway so that's what artists are doing and so one of the things I would say is buy a damn piece of art you know find one that really speaks to you and and buy a piece of art because you invite that into your life and it's it's a look out if you do it if it's a real piece of art because you'll also get a you know a little introduction to the artist and then that will seep into your life and that'll change things like mad but it's really it's unbelievably worth it because if it opens your eyes to the domain of the transcendent that's the right way of thinking about a real piece of art is a window into the transcendent that's what it is and you need that in your life because you're finite and limited and bounded right by your ignorance and your lack of knowing and unless you can make a connection to the transcendent then you don't have the strength to prevail and that's part of the Covenant that's part of the covenant with God and you can see that because you look at these magnificent cathedrals that our civilization built over the centuries you know some of those they're still built building this Sangre de Familia in in Barcelona right and it's an amazing building I think it's going to take them like 300 years to build that you know people in the Middle Ages they'd start building a cathedral they think that will be done this in 300 years you know you imagine the vision that it took to invest in something like that we look at quarterly reports we can't thank 300 years into the future to build something of that kind of remarkable remarkable what those cathedrals are so they're they're perfect they're trees first right they're a forest right the Gothic cathedrals they're they're forests and the sun is shining through the brown that's the stained glass and they're the perfect balance of light and structure because they're representing something about the proper structure of being which is something like the proper balance between light and structure and and they represent like the sacred tragedy of mankind that's why they're in the shape of a cross and they're open to the sky that's why they have a dome and they're full of gold so that glitters because that's like the City of God you know and and and you you can see that that integral to to our culture is the idea that beauty is one pathway towards God and it's in its saying if you can't find another pathway then why don't you use beauty oh sure most of you do that with music because music is the one thing that modern people can't be cynical about thank God for that and being fascinated by music because of that it speaks meaning to people right even nihilistic punk rockers are so damn engaged with their music that they can hardly stand it you can knock on them and say look you know you're having a transcendent religious experience and they'll just tell you to fuck off because that's that's what punk rockers house to do but but that's still what's happening you know I mean it's still what's happening so okay so okay so I got into all that because I was talking about about the Bible as literature you know and trying to and trying to lay out I guess we we need in our culture to justify the arts and you have to I don't want to do that by talking about high culture talking about something abstract and evanescent that's the wrong way to go about it this is vital you know like one of the things that's really interesting about the University of Toronto is that the one side of the campus where we are is beautiful medieval cathedral and the other side is god-awful factory and you know and and that and the thing is the attitude towards knowledge has paralleled that architectural transformation you know at one point the humanities let's say our sacred endeavor and so was the art of being educated in the university and that's turned into like mass factory and that's reflected in the architecture this isn't accidental none of this happens none of this happens by random chance you know it's not like there's a conspiracy or anything because there isn't but that doesn't mean that these things aren't tangled together and the loss of beauty in the universities is a catastrophe because without that beauty there's no call to higher being you know you this is also why you know I've mentioned to people that they should clean up their rooms that's become quite the internet meme but I'm really serious about it because it's really hard to do that and I've been cleaning up my room by the way for about four months now because my life was thrown into such a catastrophe and also we were renovating and so but it isn't just that you clean it up you also make it beautiful and dude it's really hard to make something beautiful and it's really worthwhile and what's really cool is if you learn to make something beautiful even one thing if you could just make one thing in your life beautiful then you've established a relationship with beauty and then you can start to expand that relationship with beauty out into into the world like into other elements of your life and that is so worthwhile it's just incredibly crazily worthwhile and that's an invitation to the divine you know you have to be daring to do that and people are terrified of it people are terrified of color they paint the walls beige they're terrified of art they buy some mass-produced thing because they don't want anybody laughing at them for their lack of taste and they would get laughed at because they have no taste but you have to well it's right because what do you know right you have to develop it and so you're going to stumble along and make mistakes to begin with and you're going to show yourself because if you buy no I think this is pretty and you know somebody comes over goes here what's up with you it's kind of hard on your self-esteem but but it's a stunt you're stumbling towards the right you're stumbling towards the kingdom of God that's what you're stumbling towards when you try to make an aesthetic decision and to put something in your life that's beautiful and it's unbelievably worthwhile to do that and you have to steer clear of the frauds and the con artists and all of that and art is full of that of course because it's difficult to distinguish between the real thing and the fraud but but it's unbelievably worthwhile and so back to literature I'm telling you this partly because I've been thinking a lot about the humanities and the arts and practically speaking because I know that artistic types are also entrepreneurial types of the same personality types and so it's very much worthwhile to make an economic and practical case for this sort of thing a study literature in the humanities so that you can familiarize yourself with the wisdom of our civilization and you should do that because people have been working on this thing for a long time and it's rich beyond comparison so why wouldn't you do that and you teach yourself to to read and you teach yourself to speak and you teach yourself to think and you teach yourself to communicate and I can tell you if you can read and think and and communicate you are absolutely 100% unstoppable and that's another thing that's so interesting about the humanities education that's at the core of the university it's like there's nothing more economically valuable than teaching people how to articulate themselves and communicate because they can identify problems they can formulate solutions they can negotiate the consensus thing they can negotiate on their own behalf on the behalf of others it's like there's absolutely no downside to it except that there's responsibility that goes along with it but it doesn't matter because there's no escape from responsibility you can either take it voluntarily or you can take it involuntarily those are your options but there aren't any other options and so we need to understand the role of art and literature and and stop thinking about it as an option it's not an option it's not an option what is it said man does not live by bread alone that's exactly right we live by beauty we live by literature we live by art and literally not metaphorically we cannot live without it because life is too dismal and and tragic in the absence of the sublime so and ourselves we have to be sharp so that we can survive properly and orient the world properly and not destroy things including ourselves and so and so back to the Bible which I do think is a reasonable it's reasonably construed as a piece of literature because it's deep and because the people who wrote it had at least one foot in the unknowable and they're trying to communicate what they experienced in the unknowable to make it known and that's partly what we're trying to do in this series and what you're trying to do while you're listening and all of that and so good for that and also that nation whom they shall serve I will judge and afterward they'll come out with great substance there'll be a period of tyranny you know and there's a psychological truth to that too one of the things I learned from reading Nietzsche because you can learn a lot from reading Nietzsche that's for sure he he talked about the Catholic Church you know Nietzsche is often construed as a great critic of Christianity and and he certainly was but he was no casual critic in fact I think he was the sort of critic that you'd like to have as a friend because he was the sort of critic that said well here's the great things you've done and that you could keep doing but here's a bunch of really neat things that you did that you really should stop doing and he talked about the Catholic Church and he said what the Catholic Church had done to the European mind in particular was discipline it so that over a period of a thousand years thirteen hundred years fourteen hundred years there was this rule that there was a conceptual structure within which you had to interpret everything and what that did was turn the European educated you European mind into a systematizing cognitive entity and that once that systematizing cognitive entity had been established then it could free itself from those underlying disciplinary structures and go off and do such things as produced the Scientific Revolution for example which required incredible systemic thinking and so Nietzsche had this really interesting idea about freedom and he believed that slavery was an intermediary between the undeveloped individual and the free individual that you had to you had to submit yourself to some intense disciplinary process for some period of time in your life before you could develop any true freedom and so you think maybe you want to learn to play the piano it's like that's not going to be any fun for a really long period of time right because you're really bad at it and there's a million things you have to memorize and you have to stumble around like a well like an amateur and the same thing happens when kids learn how to read and some of them never get past that point they never get to the point where they can enjoy reading but in order to put yourself together you have to put yourself in a vise and allow yourself to be constricted and mangled even by the thing that enslaves you but the goal should be that as a consequence of submitting to the discipline that you become disciplined and then once you become disciplined you can emerge from the disciplinary structure as someone who is free and that's something that's very much we're thinking about as well so that's Illustrated conceptually in this in this piece of literature let's say because what what the psychological meaning of what God tells Abraham is that all people all people are subject and I mean not equally obviously all people are subject to the tyranny that precedes freedom and that that ideas is repeated over and over in the Old Testament it comes up most particularly in the story of Moses right because of course that's the story of movement from tyranny where do you go from materially it's an absolute catastrophe you go from materi into the desert you know where you starve it's harsh that's what happens in the story of Exodus and so that's so interesting too because what it means is that sometimes if you're going to move uphill the first thing that happens is you move downhill a lot and so if you want to escape from the stripes that bind you now you're not going to move forward and go up you're going to move forward and go down and that's another reason this is also something that you talked about a lot is that on the road to enlightenment you encounter all the things that you don't want to encounter first like all the weaknesses of yourself all the realizations of the tyranny of the world and the catastrophe of nature and all of that and so you step out of your encapsulation you're ignorant encapsulation and its immediate plummet into something that's a desert let's say where everything is chaotic and where you're wandering around without direction a real catastrophe so it's you know because one of the things you might ask yourself is that if enlightenment is possible then why aren't people enlightened because if it was just a matter of going from a good place to a better place it's like well man let's just get at it it's no it's no problem right why would we ever stop doing that but it seems not to be that it's that you're here and that's not good and it's unstable and you step out of it it's like down down to where you don't want to be and you have to contend with that and then maybe you can start your struggle upward and so labor how God is telling Abraham this and he's also telling him that it's okay it's rough though and now and I shall go to thy fathers in peace thou shalt be buried in a good old age but in the fourth generation they shall come hither again that's the Israelites the descendants of Abraham for the iniquity of the amorite is not yet full God is going to leave the tyrants alone until they've manifested their fold here any for reasons that we don't fully understand and it came to pass that when the Sun went down it was dark behold a smoking furnace and a burning lamp that passed between the pieces all Albert Barnes said the oven of smoke and lamp aflame symbolized the smoke of destruction which we've already talked about this catastrophe of the initial stages and the light of salvation they're passing through the pieces of the victims and probably consuming them as an accepted stock rifice are the ratification of the Covenant on the part of God as the dividing and presenting of them were on the part of Abram in the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram saying unto thy seed I've given this land from the river of Egypt unto the great river Euphrates now Sarai Abrams wife bear him no children and she had a handmaid an Egyptian whose name was Hagar so this is a big catastrophe for Abraham especially in those times and perhaps now as much although perhaps people aren't as conscious of it as they once were mean for Abraham without a biological son there was no there was no there was no vision forward into the future you know and I mean we don't really know what sort of time span over which these archaic people thought but the medieval people we already said could think 300 years into the future without without batting an eye and these people who were who were concerned about their descendants were obviously thinking about existence in a way that wasn't just focused on their immediate existence right they were thinking about while their children in the grandchildren maybe their great-grandchildren maybe the whole society that that stemmed out from them and that's that's smart you know one of the things I learned from Piaget at least in part was that his idea of the Aquila graded state which he thought about as partly part of the biological basis of the idea of moral progress it's something like that it was a very very smart vision and we said that the the proper equilibrated state is one where imagine you have a family you got five people in it and you're doing what you want and your family what's good for you but you're doing it in such a way so that the other four members of your family agree with what you do and that it also facilitates them doing what they want and what they should be doing and so it's a really tricky arrangement because it isn't just for you it's for you in a way that's for them and you could also see that that would be something that would be a multiplier right because if you have everyone working voluntarily towards the same common goal then you get a multiplying effect of that and then you might think well it's not just you and your family it's you and your family today and next week in next month next year and ten years from now so you have to take the time span into account and then it should be you and your family in a way that works well in society and then it should work well now a next week and next year and into the future it should be in ratable right that's like sustainability it's something like the idea of sustainability and that's that's I would say that's a reasonable way of conceptualizing the holy city it's it's something like that you know if you're trying to make it concrete like how should you live your life well let's say you live your life in a manner that justifies its limitation and tragedy that's a good start but then let's say that it does that in a way that also reduces the limitations and suffering of the people that you interact with and now and into the future well maybe there's a way to do that I mean good negotiation does that right because if you're negotiating with someone like your wife for example what you want is for her to agree with the negotiation and one of the things that Piaget said which I think was brilliant brilliant he said if you take an equilibrated system a family let's say and a dis equilibrate it system so that would be one way or let's say the father is a tyrant and everyone is operating under his whip and you put them in a head-to-head competition the equilibrated system will out-compete the dis equilibrate system because the enforcement cost is such that it will slow the system down you know because you'll get resistances from the people inside the system they'll working the system will be working at counter purposes to itself plus there's enforcement costs and so a tyranny cannot be the nil collaborated system and I was really excited to encounter that idea because when I encountered it I was also trying to figure out if there was some quantitative difference between the system say of the Soviet Union and Mao's China and the systems of the West apart from just you know arbitrary world interpretation as the postmodern nihilists might have it if there was something fundamental at stake in the terrible Cold War that we thought it was just a matter of opinion you know in the PIA jellien take was that well roughly speaking is that the West was in equilibrated system not perfectly equilibrated but reasonably equilibrated in that people were essentially even if they were slaves to some degree they were at least voluntary slaves instead of involuntary slaves and that that was better the system was actually technically better and not just as a matter of interpretation so that's a lovely thing to know and I think it's a really really solid really really solid idea I haven't been able to you know put crowbars under that idea and lift it up I think it's a good one so now Sarai Abrams wife bear him no children so ok back to children was so one of what one of the things that's worth thinking about with regards to reading these old stories because we're so not we're very arrogant modern people I we look at these old stories and you think ah we've transcended all that superstition it's like don't be so bloody sure about that these people weren't stupid and so there's there there are ways that they viewed the world that we don't have anymore and one of them seems to be this concern for descendents because that just isn't part of our way of thinking we have a very short-term way of thinking maybe it's it's not even one lifetime long it's certainly not multiple lifetimes long and it isn't clear to me at all that that's for the best and you know the constant complaint that the environmentalists generate some of which is justified in some of which is just anti-capitalist anti-political nonsense that should be cleared out of that entire conversation is that we need to take a longer view and consider more things in our purview when we act and like that's fair enough like do we really want a notion that has nothing in it but jellyfish because that's really what we're doing and we're doing it very very rapidly and the data on that are very clear and so you know when you lift up your eyes and you make a connection with something that's transcendent then that should bring more of the world within your purview and maybe that's concern for the endless number of descendants that you might have might think - well you know if you're a successful person if you have a successful family god only knows how many people you will be the father of right it's completely because you're a nexus right all sorts of things have come together in the cosmos to produce you and then all things sorts of things manifest themselves from you you have no idea what your potential the potential consequences of your actions might be as they cascade across time right you have no idea and so Abraham at least is concerned with these sorts of things and God seems to be concerned too because he promises Abraham that if he maintains the Covenant that the most important things that he needs will come to him and they're pretty serious about this so Sarai talks to Abram she's not very happy about the fact that she can't have children she says behold now the LORD hath restrained me from bearing I pray thee go in unto my maid it may be that I obtain children by her and Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai well that's not a very trivial thing I wouldn't think I don't imagine that that Sarah was sure I was very happy about turning her maid over to her husband and potentially being usurped in the whole childbearing in the whole childbearing process not in the least but you know so it's also a major sacrifice on Sarai's part there's no doubt about that and of course it's very difficult for us to talk about the ethics of the fact that Hagar was a more or less involuntary participant in this but that was the times absolutely the case and of course slavery and indentured servitude is the way of mankind except in very very very very limited circumstances Carl Jung had something to say about that - which I really liked he said that part of the reason that modern people have it's not the only reason there's the Industrial Revolution obviously but part of the reason that modern people have been able to escape from the catastrophe of tyranny and slavery is because we've agreed to make ourselves our own slaves right so instead of owning a slave you own yourself in a sense and so you trot yourself off to work and exploit yourself so that you can stay alive and maybe it's not something that you want to do but you've taken on the role of slave in some sense in relationship to your own survival instead of forcing someone else to do it which is also something I think that's very noble about the West is that we are willing to enslave ourselves as individuals and we're not we're not doing that to other people now we're doing it to some degree obviously because the society is imperfect but that's something that's very much worth thinking about so an Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai and Sarai Abrams wife took Hagar her made the Egyptian after Abram had dwelt 10 years in the land of Canaan and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife that's the other thing that been so interesting about doing this one of the other things about doing this biblical series and it's one of the things that's so cool about Google despite the fact that they cut off my account you can find any piece of art that ever existed on Google and so that's great so you know when I'm trying to illustrate these these lectures I type in Abraham Renaissance and then like I get 200 Renaissance paintings it's so great and then I can look at them and one of the other things that's so remarkable is that all of these the major themes of these stories have been illustrated by people of spectacular mind mind-expanding talent you know there's just this endless array of well look at that I mean that's an amazing painting and so and there's and of this there's there's dozens of paintings on this theme and it's just another indication of how obsessed people you know this was the only book that existed for years and people were absolutely obsessed by it and produced all these amazing things from it and we're in danger of losing that and that's a big mistake because it's magnificent a little humility would go a long way towards restoring it and he went in done unto Hagar and she conceived and when she saw that she had conceived her mistress was despised in her eyes so I Hagar successful and like that was a hallmark of feminine success now and certainly then and so she started to lord it over suraíh which seemed a little bit on the ungrateful side I would say because sir I made a big sacrifice to allow Hagar to become Abraham's wife and so a little bit of gratitude would have been an order I suppose at least that's how the story goes and Sarai said unto Abram my wrong be upon thee I have given my maid into thy bosom and when she saw that she had conceived I was despised in her eyes the Lord judge between you and I and Abraham said unto Sarai behold thy maid is in thine hand do to her as it pleases you and when Sarai dealt hardly with her Hagar fled from her face and the angel of the Lord found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness by the fountain in the way - sure and he said Hagar Sarai's maid whence camest thou and whither wilt thou go and she said I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai and the angel of the Lord said returned to thy mistress and submit under her hands and the angel said I will multiply your seed exceedingly that it shall not be numbered for multitude and the angel said behold thou art with child and out shalt thou shalt bear a son and shalt shall call his name Ishmael and Ishmael means God hears by the way because the LORD hath heard thy affliction and he'll be a wild man his hand will be against every man and every man's hand against him and he should dwell in the presence of all his brothers and she called the name of the Lord that spake unto her thou God seest me for she said have I also here looked after him that cioth me wherefore the wall well was called beer-lahai-roi and that means the well have seized me and lives it's an interesting interlude because you know Abraham God has established this covenant with Abraham and obviously things are going wrong in the household in a really serious way like a really serious way because well he's now had a child by another woman and that the two women are not getting along and one is beating the other because of her insubordination and and contempt and so she's so desperate she runs out into the desert where she's probably going to die and God comes along and says anyways to to to to Hagar that her son shall as well be the father of Nations and so that's partly a reflection back on the power of Abraham's covenant right even though even though things are going terribly wrong locally let's say the fact that Abraham has made this overarching agreement with God means that all of these catastrophes are taking place within a bounded space with an ark we could say that's one way of looking about it and I do think I do think that that's right because it seems to me that you know if everything falls apart around you this is there's a couple of things you're going to want you're going to want someone standing beside you that's for sure that you can trust you're going to want your family around you and you want going to want them to have your back and you're going to want to know that you didn't do some goddamn stupid thing to bring all hell down on yourself and if you're lacking any of those when that crisis comes there's a high probability it will flatten you and you won't be able to get up you know it does seem to me you can ask yourself this question when things collapse around you how much utility is knowledge of your own moral virtue it's bad enough to be late it's bad to be late load but to be laid low and to know that you were the fault you were at fault for it and worse the things that you did that you knew you did that we're wrong brought you there then I think you have nothing to stand on in that situation and that's also the circumstances under which I think you're more more likely at least to be abandoned by people around you so given that you know that the catastrophe is coming right that the tragedy of life will strike you the question is well how do you fortify yourself against that and all obviously to some degree you do that by being materially sensible and these old people in the test in the old testament these ancient people they weren't blind to the utility of having a good crop and some animals you know that that's a that's an integral part of their life to take care of themselves physically but they're also wise enough to know that there's an element of moral yes what would you call it there's a necessity for moral integration that offends you against the catastrophe of existence even more effectively than anything material and even more that the stability of the material things is more dependent on the integrity of your spirit than the integrity of your spirit is dependent on the material things and I think the evidence for that is actually quite clear I read it read a very interesting book a while back called the wealth and poverty of Nations that was written by a Harvard emeritus professor of history and one of the things that he claimed I liked it I thought it was very smart was that the only true natural resource is interpersonal trust if you can set up a society where people trust each other then it will instantly become rich and he used the example of Japan which is a very conscientious society and very rich Society but the Japanese have no natural resources right one to speak of and yet the rich and then you have countries like the Soviet Russia and and much of South America where there's just natural resources that you know they're just like Venezuela just more natural resources than you know what to do with and the places are absolute catastrophes absolute catastrophe zuv cynicism and corruption and so he attempted to document the relationship between default interpersonal trust among citizens within countries and their their productivity and their GDP and their standard of living and found a very very tight relationship and and I like that a lot and I've got a story about that quickly that I think is very interesting I'll tell you two stories one sort of generic I'll tell you one personal first so one day I lent my car to one of my graduate students and he took it to Montreal this old Cadillac and he got it was a really bad rainstorm in Montreal and he was in one of the highways that are like set into the ground and it was like six inches of water and he was turning a corner hit the brakes and skidded on the water and smacked it into the wall and on the corner of the of the bumper you know and so then he brought it back and he was very apologetic about it and and name was Matt shade tell you that because Matt might hear this and I could shame him a bit for doing this 20 years ago you know and he's a professor at the Ontario Institute of Technology I think now and quite a successful one but anyways he brought the car back and I went and got it evaluated for damages it was like $1700 or something to repair it and maybe more but it was almost as much as the car was worth I thought well I'm not going to do that so I went online and I typed in the part and if you do that you can get people to bid on sending you a used part from all over North America so that's kind of cool so there's all these junk dealers have got together and they have this you know network of communication so you put in the car pardon then they send you a bid and so this guy said well I'll send you the bumper assembly which is the whole bumper and the lights for like 250 bucks and I thought yeah ok you could do that that'd be good so then I said yes and then he called me up about half an hour later this guy from way down south he had a really deep sort of Mississippi accent he said wait a sec was that for the bumper or the bumper assembly and I said well this was the bumper assembly he said oh I thought it was for the bumper then he said but that's ok I'll send it to you anyways I thought well that's pretty good so I said well thank you and then I hung up and then half an hour later he called me up again and he said look I just went out looked at that bumper assembly and there's a plastic trim piece on the side and it has a scratch in it and I thought I'd better tell you that just in case you didn't want it and I thought wow that's so amazing it's like there's a miracle man it's like this guy he's somewhere in Mississippi I'm never going to see him again ever I'm never going to have any contact with them like he made a bad deal right because the part was worth more than he decided to sell it to me for but he stuck with his deal and then he went over and above the call of duty he said well this part that I'm selling you to you for way less than it's worth is damaged so I thought I better tell you it's like man you got to recognize a miracle when you see one that was a miracle so I said hey look good thanks for calling man it's okay I can handle the scratch stand apart and he did and I got the car fixed and forgave Matt and you know how to have the ending so so that's trust right because I didn't know him from Adam and he's a primate full of snakes just like the rest of us and yet he was willing to simplify himself to the point where I could just take him absolutely at his word and that meant we could trade even though we were strangers it's like man do not under estimate the utility of that and then there's eBay so when eBay first started you know the idea was it's not going to work because you'll send me junk and I'll send you a check that bounces and that'll be the end of eBay right and so these escrow agents popped up so you could ensure your transaction with them for like ten percent of the transaction they would get the check and the goods and make sure that they were okay and then send them on or ensure the transaction but what happened was the escrow agents didn't make any money and the reason for that was no one cheated now you think about how amazing that is right you bring these people together across a whole continent they've never seen each other before they're never going to interact with each other again and this was before there were any reputation ratings on eBay and yet the default transaction was you describe your goods honestly including their flaws you set a reasonable price I decide to pay you ship the goods and I pay you and it works and what happened was that eBay produced it produced a tremendous amount of capital that was previously frozen so frozen capital is when you've invested money in something but the thing is no longer useful to you so the money is just sitting there frozen right so to speak and you can't get it loose because well you've got attic full of junk how are you going to get rid of that OE Bay and so all of a sudden all these things that were just junk became valuable and everybody got richer and none of that wouldn't it would have happened without the Covenant that we established between each other that's predicated on trust and so you might say that trust is the currency and currency is trust because it's a promissory note right and if people lie then the currency gets to based very very rapidly and so the economy runs on trust and so that's part of the overarching covenant so abraham makes this covenant with god and he decides that he's going to aim high and live a good life and tell the truth and that puts this boundary around him it's like a walled garden it's like a walled garden and inside there there's all sorts of things that are happening that are complex and difficult but outside there's a boundary and the boundary is well maybe things won't it's like God says after the flood he says I'll never send a flood again that's part of the story and so there's an information there that no matter how bad things get they won't get so bad that they'll be catastrophic but there's a but there's a coded to that which is that you have to maintain the covenant and we don't know what that means you know because you know what you think it's pretty obvious that if you treat people well if you really think about it and you're not being naively optimistic and like you know a nice good person throughout with all the weakness that that that that that intimates if you're being hard-nosed and sensible you understand that if you treat people if you trust people that's an act of courage if you're not naive right if you're naive it's an act of stupidity because you might get bit and you probably will and if you're not even you get bit you will suffer for it it'll traumatize you but if you're not naive and you know you can get bit then you might ask well what should you do with people and the answer is you should trust them not because you're naive and not because they couldn't betray you and not because you don't know that they could be true but because if you hold out your hand in trust then you're inviting the best part of that person to step forward and that won't happen unless you take that initial step and that's courage not naivety and so to trust someone once your eyes are open that's an act of courage and that opens up the world you know when you might say okay and so there's this idea in this story that you can withstand it a fair bit of the catastrophe of life by establishing the proper covenant and by acting in a trustworthy manner and extending your hand to people properly and you might say well okay that's sensible I can understand how that would work and I can certainly see how the opposite wouldn't work because you know if I have to be absolutely terrified that you're going to be training at every possible moment and we're in a negotiation we're not going to get any work done man because I'm going to be figuring out what you're up to all the time and you're going to be figuring out what I'm up to all the time and we're just not going to get anywhere you'll come and say you're going to do something and I can just simplify you I can say you're going to do what you said you do I don't have to worry about you and then the same applies to me and then we can go do something and that's how we generate wealth so then you might say well if what's the ultimate limit of that you know like we know that there's corruption in our society that people betray each other there's deceit and all of that and it causes things like the periodic collapse in 2008 which was complicated but was partly engendered by corruption like what would be the upside if we acted if we really determined to act honestly what do you think it is that people would be able to do with the world if we stopped acting in a corrupt manner I mean what what's the like what if what is OP side you think we could could could how far back could we push aging do you think if we hit it hard for 50 years can we triple our lifespan it wouldn't surprise me you know all these terrible diseases that beset the planet we could get rid of them there's no reason for hunger and starvation we make enough food it's like what would happen if we stopped acting badly how much better could things get well you start locally I think you start with yourself and you start with your family but you know there's intimations of the divine there's in the intimations of the kingdom of God and the covenant with God in the Old Testament it's like you think well we speak secularly you think well that's an unprovable assumption it's like well we'll just clone a sec what's the Assumption here exactly what is the operand for Humanity I mean who's who's going to say right who's going to say especially in this day and age man there's so many things happening that you can't even comprehend them what did we do if we put all of our effort into it well you can experiment with that because you can start in your own household you can start in your own room and you could make miracles happen in the confines of your own space there's no doubt about that all you have to do is try you'll see that that happens it happened people are writing to me and telling me that they're trying this and that that's exactly what's happening and so so we don't want to be too cynical about about where we might be headed and Hagar bore Abram a son Abram called his son's name which hagar bear ismael who is by tradition the forefather of several Arab nations and of Muhammad himself and Abram was four score and six years old when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram so that's the end of another story and then so that section ends and then again we have an encounter between Abraham and God who Abram was ninety years old and nine ninety nine years old the Lord appeared to them and said I'm the Almighty God walk before me and be thou perfect Alexander McLaren who was a biblical commentator who lived in the early 19th century said this phrase walking before God is not precisely walking with God because that's what Noah did right he said it's rather that of an act of life spent in continual consciousness of being naked and opened before the eyes of him to have whom we have to give account I was pretty happy to stumble across that because it I mean I might have picked and chosen of course you never know that whether you do that but it does seem in keeping with the narrative strain of the chapter right because what we've bought this eye so far is that God is called Abraham and said you know get out there in the world go go to where it's unknown go to where you're a stranger and get away from the familiar go out to the unknown establish yourself and great things will come of it regardless of the proximal evidence great things will come of it and so I think that's what the walking before God refers to it's not like Abraham does act uncertainty there's no certainty here that that's the act of the leap of faith even because it does require a leap of faith for you to move into the world because the world is a catastrophe of self-evidently the world is a catastrophe and so there's there's there's every reason for you to assume that you should sit in your basement and hide from it but that's that's not it doesn't help it doesn't make things better and the thing is perhaps you're not built for that you're not built to hide I don't think that people are built to hide I think it destroys them and so walking before God in some sense means the neighbor heaven we could say is taking the lead he's the person that's going out there until the unknown God says well great things are going to happen but he's a little short on details that's for sure so the way to skill on Abraham and that's a good thing because it also that a noble's Abraham right that's the other thing that's so cool is that if God had just laid out the whole story and and you know brush the branches from Abraham's path while I was walking forward well then there'd be nothing for Abraham to do there'd be no nobility in his own pursuit and this is another thing that we don't understand very well it's a really tough thing to understand it's like how much trouble would you want there not to be it's a weird question right because you want to have something to contend with you want to have something that that forces from you the best that you have and so you have to have real problems something like that would you dispense with all your real but you could just lay down on the bed have pablum infused into your mouth you know if all your problems were solved and so maybe you want difficult problems that you can solve something like that because there's some I don't know what it is about it there's there's the overcoming and the growth that comes along with that there's something about the nobility of the enterprise you certainly see that when you go about having children for example which is you know the psychological literature is quite clear if you do moment-to-moment comparisons of people who have kids and people who don't have kids the people who don't have kids are happier and so psychologists who tend to get things wrong even when they make intelligent discoveries like that one immediately some of them jump to the conclusion that because happiness is the goal that well there's something about children that you know make you unhappy and that's not good it's like wait a second and maybe that's the wrong metric it's like of course you're less happy once you have children because you have to worry about them you know my neighbor down the street who's very smart woman said to me once you can only be as happy as your unhappiest child and which I thought it was really good you know that's really smart but then it isn't it well if having children doesn't make you happy the answer isn't don't have children it's like don't be so stupid about being happy that's the answer it's because there's a nobility in the pursuit right and of course now you're responsible you know you have a new baby you think especially if you're a new parent you think what the hell is this is what am I going to do with it you know it's like and then you're done for the rest of your life you never sleep properly again because you're going to be worried about this creature that you have to take care of and but like what the hell good are you if you're not doing that or something else equally difficult because you just you just haven't been called out yet unless you take on a responsibility like that the idea that life is you know that happiness is the purpose of life it's like great for happiness man if it comes along you should be thrilled that it's visiting you but the notion that that's that that's what you should pursue that's that's the weakest possible notion first of all as soon as something terrible happens to you you're done like places to be happy it's like well now you have cancer so how's that how's the happiness thing work it out for you now or maybe it's not you you know maybe it's your father that held the Alzheimer's disease or some damn thing and you know it's like it's a rare person that doesn't have some cat-tastrophe one one person away from them is like life is to be happy it's that's not right and we can at least derive that from these stories that isn't what they say at all God's perfectly happy in the stories to grant the people with whom he forms a covenant happiness and prosperity but there's never a word that that's the purpose that the rule is aim high and get your bloody act together that's the rule and establish this contractual covenant with the ultimate ideal and that will see you through the catastrophes and that's a much more mature way of looking at life as far as I'm concerned because all you have to do is have your eyes half open and you see that the fundamental reality of life is tragedy and so there's death inescapable the quest that doesn't mean that it it makes life unbearable or that it makes being something that shouldn't have existed right that isn't what it means but it means that you have to contend with it and you have to get ready and the willingness to adopt responsibility for yourself and for others is is the precondition for that and and then maybe if you do that properly then now and then you get some happiness you know you can sit at the end of the day and you have half an hour where your conscience is clear and there's nothing that you need to be doing and you can relax and think you know that that's all right things are ok and thank God for that and that's that's maybe where you get your happiness so and that's something that's growing up man obviously and to not know that and to not be taught that like everyone should be taught that it's so obvious we should be taught that well that's partly what these biblical stories do and I'll make my covenant between me and thee and we'll multiply the exceedingly and Abram fell on his face yeah and God talked with him saying as for me behold my covenant is with thee and thou shall be a father of many nations God says there's a lot Abram right it's almost like he has to remind him now and then and it's not surprising because he keeps going through these unbelievable adventures you know that are really psychologically and socially shattering so it's a good thing that this reminder pops up in honor and fairly frequently but of course Abraham is also open to it and I think what does it mean you know I'll talk personally for a moment I guess so I've asked myself a lot of questions in the last eight months man I can tell you that and I'm still asking myself a lot of questions and I've been conferring with a lot of people because I had lots of people who were helping me negotiate whatever the hell this is that's happening and you know I could ask them how it was doing and they would tell me a bunch of things I was doing wrong and some things I was doing right and I could listen to them I was asking questions all the time about how the hell I should manage this properly and you know what what I was trying to do and what seemed to serve me properly was to figure out how to do it correctly that was the issue it's like I didn't really care what happened and I guess I really don't care what happens but I do care if I do it correctly because I don't want to screw it up I don't want to screw things up and that seems to be a reasonable goal for people I mean wouldn't you like that as a goal that you don't screw things up because you can't control - you know your life isn't fully under your control by any stretch of the imagination but it might be nice to not have your conscience see eating at you saying look you know you had a big opportunity there and you mucked it up because you're weak and blind and he didn't listen that's no good the cast the catastrophe is bad enough as I said without you being the bloody source of it and so well that's Abram falling on his face I guess and also communing with God it's like you know he wants to get it right he wants to get it right and there's these these things that beckon in promise but but it's it's bloody easy to make a catastrophic mistake and you'll do that in your life you know and and maybe humility is one of the things that can prevent that because you can look and you can think okay what am I doing wrong what am I doing wrong what can I do better how could I do this properly and then maybe you know you get you get you get the intimation of the proper way to move forward and maybe that's what protects you when things are chaotic and Andean strife and who knows what that's worth neither shall thy name any more be called Abram which means hi King if I remember correctly but thy name shall be Abraham for a father of many nations have I made the oh yes Abram why father look at that Abraham means father of a multitude and I will make the exceedingly fruitful and I will make nations have the productive right productive and that seems to be something that's that's good to be I mean like one of the things that I've thought about deeply I thought deeply about death and the death of my family members and about funerals and I thought about it partly because I had this weird experience once that I think I told you about where I took one of my clients to see an embalming which was very strange experience and I had a chance to talk to the funeral directors you know because they have weird jobs you know there's this idea well the Freudian idea that people suffer from this terrible death anxiety and there's a whole line of social psychological theory theorizing called terror management theory that's predicated on the idea that we defend ourselves against death anxiety with our belief systems and like it's a pop it's Ernest Becker's idea he wrote the denial of death which is a great book but there's a weakness in it because you see some people who aren't like that you know like emergency room nurses aren't like that and palliative care nurses aren't like that my sister-in-law's a palliative care nurse that's a hard job right because you go in there you're caring for people you have and they're in pain they're on the last legs you're trying to make them comfortable and you have a relationship with them because how the hell are you going to make them comfortable if you don't and then they go and die on you and that just happens that's what happens every day right and what's weird is that people can be palliative care nurses it's like how do you figure that out because people can actually thrive in the face of death strangely enough and like these funeral parlor directors they were interesting to talk to because that's all they do right they just deal with them they deal with death and grief all the time and it was very interesting talking to them because I talked to two of them they found their job extremely meaningful and I asked them well you know does that what does that do to your life you know you're saturated with death and suffering and there and this is the same answer that I got from Natalia's care nurse is that it doesn't undermine your life it enriches it now who would guess that right I mean what the hell that just doesn't make any sense at all but what it does is speak to human possibility because god only knows how tough you are you know I mean if you read history and you read about what people have done you think wow we're pretty tough people are I read there's a shipwreck in the Antarctica hundred years ago so and I read the story it's not a biography if I remember correctly of the of the captain I might be wrong about but I've got the basic story right well dad a shipwreck in the Antarctica was then they were there for a whole year in the Antarctica you know and none of them died not one you didn't lose a single man not one he kept them around high and then they took this boat that was on the ship and cross-like 400 miles of the roughest ocean the roughest frigid ocean in the world right you don't go in that ocean and then they went to an island and they walked across the island across these mountains that no one else has ever climbed since and they went to the city on the other side of the island they got a boat and went rescued there are conveyed trips and everyone survived it's like endurance is the name of the book you read that book and you think wow people are really tough you know and isn't it and it's ridiculous so who knows how tough you are and maybe you find out by going out to find out how tough you are right so you take on a challenge one that you think you can master just it's just a bit beyond your grasp and you master it and then you're little tougher and you think hey that worked out pretty well and so then you're more of a monster and then you go out you find another challenge that's even bigger and you think well maybe I can do that too and then all of a sudden you can and you get a little bit bigger and god only knows what the limit is of you and you find out by pushing yourself against the world and of course that's what Abraham is doing and so see we're very pessimistic us modern people you know we're pessimistic about humanity that's for sure dismal wretched planet destroying cancer on the planet right as the Club of Rome described us so pleasantly back in the 1960s you know and I don't know maybe we're ashamed of the Cold War maybe we're ashamed of all the destruction in the 20th century and the hydrogen bomb and and the you know the continuing catastrophes of our societies and we're deeply ashamed of that and ashamed of ourselves personally but it's a hell of a thing to you know call us a cancer on the planet there's just no excuse for that because what you do with cancer is eradicated and I don't think that that's a very noble motive personally and I think it says a lot about the people who would use such phraseology that they would dare to conceptualize humanity in that manner but you know it'd be nice if we could be optimistic and I think began the problem with being optimistic is that it's naive so then the question is is there an optimism that's not naive and I think there is an optimism that's not naive isn't just a a visualization of how strong people can be so one of the things that I tell people I told my students in my class and maps of meaning here is a goal you want to be the person at the funeral of your father that everyone can rely on how would that be you want to be the person who's broken and useless and adding to the misery in the corner and look I'm not making light of people's brief you know I understand grief but who do you want to be when there's a crisis right you want to be the person that everyone can turn to for strength it's like why the hell not why not that as a goal that would be a good goal because then if there's a crisis and there will be it won't be such a bloody crisis there will be someone there that can deal with it you know so when I went talk to these people if you know whom I envisioned that I thought okay well this is something you have to contend with if you're going to be alive an adult you have to contend with death and suffering and you have to be ready for it and you have to be there for the person because that's all they're going to have and so there's a goal man and in this time of nihilism you know it's what's the point of life people ask and and they're taught that at universities what's the point of life everything's interpretation humanity's a cancer on the planet you know well how about no how about not that how about that there's something to us and I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant to be a god unto thee and to thy seed after thee and I'll give unto the into thy seed after thee the land wherein thou art a stranger all of the land of Canaan because of course Abraham went out into the land of strangers right but it says that he'll master if he keeps his covenant he'll master the land of strangers that's a wonderful thing to know and I think a true thing you know because if you're dealing with strangers I've dealt with lots of strange people in my life five and clinical psychologists and that isn't to say that everyone that I've dealt with was strange because that's not the case but I have encountered some very strange people and know the way to deal with strange people is to you never lie to a strange person that's the thing especially if they're paranoid you never lie to someone who's paranoid it will come back to bite you and if you're in an extreme situation with someone who's very unpredictable the only thing you have that works is the truth that works I'll tell you a little story this is in my book so I had this landlord in Montreal he lived next door to me he was an exhales angel Spiker he'd spent a lot of time in prison and his wife had borderline personality disorder and she committed suicide when I lived there and here's a rough guy and he was at québécois and he spoke ul which I could hardly understand and he didn't really know what to make of me and I didn't really know what to make of him but we got along you know I was very careful talking to him as you might imagine but but I was it was very anyway we went over my wife and I went over there we had the spaghetti dinner one night and we sort of communicated and I bought a poster from him because he made these wooden posters that had neon on them and that's how he made a living he'd kind of trained himself to be a bit of Electronics kiyah so he made these things and he was trying to quit drinking and we talked about that he was a lot older than me who's like 20 years older than me I was about 25 at this point and we got along pretty well but every now and then he'd go out and get and drink and he could really drink you know like he was one of these guys who could drink like 60 beer and you think well no one can drink that much and you're wrong I studied alcohol for like 10 years some of my subjects fathers drank 40 ounces of vodka a day and had been doing it for 20 years so you can drink a lot and he could drink a lot and what would happen he's trying to not drink but he'd go out and go on a binge and then he'd be going for like three days and he'd drink up all his money and then we'd hear him out in the backyard howling at the moon with this little little ugly dog he had you know and he'd howling the dog would howl and he'd how long the dog would howl and and it was rather unsettling and made my wife nervous man and but worse you know now and then he'd come to the door at like 3:00 in the morning eh and he'd knock on the door and he'd be standing there and I don't know how much experience you've had with rough guys who are alcoholic and who were drunk but it's they can be upright and unconscious at the same time and so that was the state that he was in you know he'd be just swaying and he'd asked me if I would like to buy his toaster or his microwave because he needed some money to keep drinking and you know I didn't really want to buy his toaster or his microwave but when the exhales angel is you all speaking 60 beer drunk okay but for biker shows up at your door at 3:00 in the morning and offers you to sell offers to sell you his microwave huh the easiest thing is to say I really need a microwave so so you know I bought the microwave and the toaster and some other things but then but then my wife talked to me and she liked my landlord you know even though she was afraid of him she liked him and and she said you can't buy any more any more appliances because it's not good for him and I thought huh that's an interesting problem you know so what the hell am I going to do about this because no I don't want to buy your microwave just doesn't seem to be the right answer at 3:00 in the morning so so one time he took me out on his 750 Honda and he put me on the back of it he wanted to show me his lair I guess his hangouts and I got his wife's helmet on but it didn't fit it just sit on the top of my head and he said I got on the bike and he said if the cops chase us were not stopping no way we went and we went to these like these bars downtown on sand they were very rough places he got into like four fights that night because he was a rough guy you know and these kind of punk guys would come up to him and sort of challenge him and act stupidly around him and he was very skeptical and if you were acting stupidly around him pretty length of time he just hit you because he felt that that's what you deserved and perhaps he was right you know so so I had first-hand opportunity to observe him so anyways he sure enough about a week or two after we had this conversation he showed up at the door knock knock knock you know open the door and they standing there you know with his eyes kind of half closed and he was swaying and he had I don't remember what the appliance was this time but he wanted to sell it to me and I said I not all I can buy this I'm not going to buy this because I know you're trying to quit drinking and if I give you this money then you're going to go and drink it up and it's not going to be good for you and what else did I tell him I think I told him as well that this whole thing of him coming to my house at like 2:00 in the morning was scaring my wife who he liked and that it had to stop and believe me man I was thinking about what I was saying because he was watching me like a rough guy watches you and a rough guy watches you like this he thinks if you say one thing that indicates contempt you're going to bloody well pay for it and so I was finding my words like you know I was crossing a swamp and trying to look for the for the rocks underneath the surface and I said what I had to say very very carefully and he looked at me for about 15 seconds and that's a long time to be looked at at 3:00 in the morning huh and he left and he never came back to sell me anything again and we got along fine but that's a good illustration of this issue with regards to truth and success in this strange land because I was in the strange land when I was talking to my neighbor my landlord and and I managed to say what was true carefully enough so despite the fact that he was a very violent person and that he was a very intoxicated person and then he had every reason to be suspicious of me and we couldn't communicate very well and I didn't do what he wanted that he took it and he left and there was no problem and life went on just fine after that and so we don't want to underestimate the utility of establishing this bounded relationship with the ideal and attempting to live with some nobility in truth while aiming at the highest ideal there's nothing about that that's anything but strengthening and positive and it's exactly what you need to set against the catastrophe and uncertainty of life and as far as I can tell that's what these Abrahamic stories are attempting to communicate so we'll stop there thank I have to make an announcement I'm going to do a talk August 22nd I think not sure of the date but all I'll find out with GAD sod from Concordia and so I'm with a with the next social worker named Serena Singh and with faith Goldie I think faith is going to be there as well so the tickets for that will go on sale I'm not hosting this someone else is dealing with it but the tickets for that will go on sale within approximately a week and I'll post that on my I'll probably make an announcement on YouTube but I'll twit Twitter and Twitter it and all of that so and I think I mentioned to you guys last week that I would like to continue this series but I think I'll do it once a month and I'll try to do it in this theater but I haven't got word from the people who run the theater that's the University whether or not it'll be accessible but I'll figure something out and so oh hi Serena Serena is the person who's going to be hosting this it's August 22nd 7 to 10 p.m. at Ryerson ok tickets go on sale Monday all right and then and then oh there's a special freedom of speech edition of the Hemmingway's restaurant Jordan Peterson discussion group tonight so that's at 10:00 p.m. so you're all welcome to attend out so that's 142 Cumberland Street ok so that's it for announcements I guess and then let's say for questions yes I was going to let you ask the first question last time was not okay so I will do that and so let's make sure again everybody to speak into the mic clearly so that the YouTube people can hear and you know the ghostly to YouTube people ah and so go ahead. I was quite impressed with your presentation last week and I wasn't quite sure where it was going at one point and what neither neither was on and that's okay because at one point I listened I thought what you basically were talking about this is what I saw you're embodying mind body and spirit and bringing it all together as one and you touch on it a bit tonight when you talk when you talk about truth this is where we need to go right and I know you can be positive and all that and yeah that's right I agree it's scary what's going on right now however we have the power to stay in the positive what you talked about last week you talked about using our intuition which I consider our higher self using consciousness and you made reference I can't remember exactly what you what you said that you held your hand and you talked about emotions and bringing intellect on top. and when you said emotions everything just lit up for me because I'm thinking that's our heart chakra that's what combines our lower self our physical being the material stuff all the all the stuff that doesn't really motivate us with our higher self and when when you talked about emotion I want to talk about the emotion of love and I find so many people are terrified it's a four-letter word I know but it doesn't have to be bad. Okay so I remember why when I talked to you last week while I wanted you to ask this question so okay so I've talked a lot in this lecture series about truth and you know I think there's a battle in the biblical stories all the way through between love and truth in terms of their primacy and so and I've concentrated a lot on truth in my own thinking but I stand it's hard to talk about love because it's a word that people have mouth to death you know as soon as you start talking about love then people should just go into a different room and and not listen to you you know because it gets it can get sappy and new-agey just like that and and I don't like that at all but but it still is something that has to be contended with and I think so I've been trying to conceptualize let's say what this covenant might might constitute and I think the love part so here's this so you know there's this book by Goethe called Faust and it's in two volumes first one and falls to logically enough one was written much later than the other hand Faust basically sells his soul to the devil for foreknowledge and the devil in Faust is netha Stoffel ease and mephistopheles is quite a well-developed character and gert that has memphis tov please say what he's about which is really quite cool so it's like the adversary of the world evil itself gets a chance to speak and make its case and Goethe thought this was so important that he actually had Memphis tall fleas announced himself once in Faust one and then using the same words you know phrase differently again in in part two it really struck me it really struck me and so what Memphis Dali says is that the world is such a charter house of suffering and destruction that it would be better if it never existed and so that what he's working to is to bring existence to an end because it is not justified by its suffering it's like that's it's an argument very similar to the argument that's made by a isin camera camera radsolv thank you Thanks Russians say you can't pronounce them or live with them you can but he'd basically he's an atheist and does a very good job of detailing out the Atheist argument or it may be an anti theist argument and he's arguing with his his brother Alyosha who's a monastic novitiate who was a very good guy but not an intellect Ivan's an intellect and a very powerful one and he basically tells Alyosha that the all of the cosmos isn't worth the suffering of one child he tells this story about this and this Dostoyevsky took this from a newspaper about this parents that locked their four-year-old daughter in an outhouse overnight and she screamed about it until she froze to death and so Dostoyevsky used that argument he tied that into Ivan's antitheist argument against Elio she's very very powerful argument The Brothers Karamazov is an absolutely mind-boggling amazing book I would highly recommend it and so that's a message awfully in perspective mr. Feeley in perspex in its perspective is that being itself is so corrupted it shouldn't exist so then you think okay well that fair enough that's a decent argument understandable but the problem comes when you try to implement that and what happens when you implement it as far as I can tell you adopt out mist at first aphelion attitude of it earnest and resentment and destruction is that you make all the suffering that you're complaining about far worse I think that's what happened at the base of things in the 20th centuries that there was a powerful movement among human humanity to bring being itself to a halt you know what culminated in the development of the hydrogen bomb and and the high probability for many at many periods of time that we were going to do something permanent and fatal which seems like a bad idea it seems like a bad idea well so what's the opposite of the myths just athenian attitude and i think the opposite of that is what's presented in the biblical stories in the guise of love and that is the wish that things would be good it's something like that that's what love is i think is that it's the attempt to orient yourself towards making things better and it's predicated on something like a deep appreciation for being despite its suffering and deficiencies and maybe a decision that you're going to act to bring about things to move things towards the good and i think that's the thing that sets the parameters of that of them it's it's the opposite of the memphis to feel ian's attitude it's like to work towards the betterment of being because you've decided that you're going to open your heart to existence something like that and it's within that framework that truth takes place I think his truth has to serve something it can't remit conserve truth but it has to be bounded inside something and I think that's what it's bounded inside so what I was going to refer to with that was David Hawkins real power versus force and he put it on a quantifiable scale all different emotions he called a consciousness and he put love at 528 Hertz he put shame at 20 I'm not sure if I've got these 100% right guilt I think at 30 fear at 50 and it shows you how far the people who are really knocked down have to get to love and I'm thinking if we could quantified love on a term it means different things to everybody and rightly so but can we get to that frequency and if you look at the Solfeggio notes you know the musical notes maybe I'm afraid of I'm going to I'm going to ask you to stop if you would because I should I should go to another question if you thank you very much okay so you've been an educator through the rise of the smartphone and my question basically relates to procrastination and Pascal a needless task away specifically and given the unprecedented level of distraction that we have in today's world I just want to get your perspective from a psychological standpoint on other than cleaning your damn room what would you suggest to a student who's looking to overcome these things well I think with any let's call it addictive process I mean email is powerfully addictive right hardly it's a slot machine and I mean that technically so when you pull it's a that's a variable ratio reinforcement schedule if I remember correctly and it's very addictive because if you pull on the slot machine arm enough you will win and you never know which poll will reward you and so not only is that addictive it's very hard to extinguish that and so emails like that because there's always something beckoning and now and then it's a jackpot and social medias like that because you know people are posting interesting things and so well how do you overcome an addictive process and partly you do it by replacing it with something better right so when people study drug and alcohol you say they often make an elementary mistake which is to try to figure out why people use drugs and alcohol that's that's not a smart thing to wonder we know why people use cocaine cocaine directly stimulates the systems that produce positive emotion it's like so there's no mystery there the mystery with cocaine is very very simple why don't people take cocaine all the time until they die that's the mystery really because you can get isolated rats to do that so and then for some people alcohol has the same kind of effect except it's mediated by opiates but often what people have to do to get themselves out of an addictive process is to fuck something better to do to replace it and so I would say the problem with the gadgets and I mean they're amazing things is that they interfere with they proximately interfere with medium to long term goals I would say and so I think the first thing you have to do to bring them under control is figure out what it is that their use is interfering with it has to be something important so you think well I knew I want to do something important what is that it could be personal maybe you want to have a relationship you want to get married you want to have kids you want to have a career that's meaningful you know you want have a life you want to have an Abrahamic adventure and be the father of Nations let's say we can't be ratting away on your cell phone and doing that and so I think I think part of it is to set your sights high and make a plan and figure out who you could be and see if obsessive utilization of smart phone fits into that vision of nobility and it will partly because they're they're unbelievably powerful communication devices but so so often it's it's for lack of something better to do and it also interferes so that's about the best I can do with that hello dr. Peterson so you've been you've been talking with some of the conservative candidates for leadership this year any talk with most all of them right not all of them but a number of them you talked with Andrew that yes I did yes so um so something very interesting popped up in my Facebook feed so it was a ad for the Conservative Party and it was suggesting that we cut you cut funding to public universities that don't support free speech and yeah that was probably my fault yeah see precisely because because this is something you say in some of your Wilder moments you suggest that we should cut the universities funding by 25 percent let them battle it out for the remains and he's taken that too you know his his platform but now what you're doing is well you one of the things you're doing is you've created this website that identifies the postmodern lexicon and helps people distinguish between postmodern courses and not and so people don't take them or take them if they want yeah yeah so that's a it'd be interesting to know like what sort of malevolent post modernist just study you meticulously and try to use all your knowledge of it anyway so but but what you've said though you said that what we need to do is starve it out from this yeah ok so I yeah that look so why do I know where you're going so about two weeks ago three weeks ago I went up to northern Saskatchewan and my parents have a cottage up there it's way the hell out in the middle of nowhere and there's no cell phone although we do have internet now which is you know probably bad and good but anyways I got to take a bit of a break which was good because I haven't really been able to think because you know more broadly about say what I'm doing because I who they held I don't know what the hell I'm doing exactly this is a this is all very strange and but but one thing I thought about I was out on the lake I was canoeing around and I thought I'd thought about war you know because I was very irritated I'm very irritated about what to the universities and there's a hint of malevolence about it and I'm not a fan of ideological possession and I've been set back up on my heels a lot over the last eight months by the onslaught of what emerged when I said that there was words I wouldn't say and so it's put me into a defensive posture let's say and I had been thinking in terms of war metaphors you know like this is a battleground and that there's a war going on an ideological war and I do believe that that's true but then I was reading and I I did this partly for this course I was reading the Sermon on the Mount and one of the things it says is resist not evil and I don't know wanted to make of that line and so I was talking to a bunch of people about it and reading about it a lot and trying to figure out what it meant and partly what it means is don't waste time right because when you fighting against something then there's something else you're not doing and then I thought also when I was out there on the lake I thought well do I really want to be in a war because of war that's not that's not that's not that's not heaven that's for sure it's really stressful and people get hurt and so I thought well maybe that's just the wrong way of thinking about it even though there's a battleground issue here and I thought well wait a second maybe maybe the right thing to do in a situation like this and this is maybe something that those on the alt-right might consider is that the right thing to do maybe is to outline a better way rather than go out directly on the attack now that might be seem somewhat at odds with my idea of the website and perhaps it is somewhat at odds with that I'm not sure about that but what I'm trying to do instead of conducting this like a war let's say is to conduct it like a movement towards something better and and that would be better now with regards to cutting the universities funding I thought about that too and I thought wait a second that's not going to work out because it's inviting political interference into higher education now the political interference might be of the counterbalancing kind because the evidence that the humanities in particular have tilted almost a hundred percent to the left is overwhelming and so maybe some counterbalance from the right would set things more towards the middle but the problem is is when you open up the door to political interference with higher education content you can't close the door again and so on reflection I thought that it probably was a suboptimal idea and that would be better instead was - and what of this is what I want to do when I launch the website I want to ask students the students who will be using it's like what do you want from university because here's here's your options you can you can come out ideologically possessed right you can buy this doctrine this pathological doctrine and you can become bitter and resentful and you won't learn to communicate properly and you won't read the great works of civilization and you won't learn to think and write you won't become Noble in body and spirit is that what you want or do you want the opposite do you want a real education and and then I want to explain what that means like I did tonight to some degree you know that there's absolute value in learning how to put yourself together and to communicate and to familiarize yourself with with with the classic works of civilization and I want to offer that I want to do what I can to offer that as the proper alternative instead of staying in sconce tin this notion of a battle which is just I just don't think it's the right metaphor so either in dr. Petersen I just want to say that I think what you're doing is absolutely miraculous it helps change my life and I'm sure at least raise your hand is dr. Peterson is help change your life so for the better or for the worse asking to look at it well it's about it's about 40 people maybe and that's miraculous you know and I think and and your thinking is going to be it's going to be it's going to be all over the place in the Canadian election in two years and I think the coop that's a horrible thing to go hey you better watch out for everybody and uni ends and and there's there's going to be a lot of talk about how how how andrew shears political message is going to stem from years and i think it's really important that he he doesn't censor himself like other conservative politicians are doing and because i don't know we need to unite under a valid thoughtful articulate conservative voice and what do we have now we have we have trump that's what you know we don't have any we don't have any strong articulate male voices in our in our in our political discourse right now that's what it's definitely time for you to develop one so looks like you're on the right path hello loco peterson thank you for everything you've done this past year and i do we never take the political stuff lecture series get you to move justice yes great belted out man okay so i'll try to be succinct I have two comments on one question okay first Kuhlman as you mentioned how you were prevented from uploading your YouTube video from last week yeah I actually attend that lecture and I make pretty detailed notes if you can maybe I can email you that's okay I've got it it's my accounts reinstalled restored me and stored hahaha restored yeah and so it's okay it's okay it's it's straightened out and I'm going to upload all the videos to a bunch of other sites and so this isn't going to happen again so but I appreciate that we miss some lectures and everyone else hated them online yeah my second comment is about sort of kind of going into the commentaries of christian theologist over the centuries like you've known yourself I just would like to encourage everybody to also look at not just Western Christianity but also Eastern Christianity like the Orthodox writings there's a big difference between the two and that the Western sort of theology comes out of the Roman Roman law Roman justice so there's a lot more of an emphasis on cannot justice and Christ came she died on the cross for our sin so there's that look kind of like legal payback moon what I mean right whereas turn the eastern theologies a lot more it focuses a lot more in love and on sort of the the positive aspects and if you do read like the first four centuries of Christianity where there was no schism there's very little mention of like a sort of legalistic framework it's a lot more I don't know a per se or more heartfelt I guess so I think it's important that we also in the West look at the eastern counterpart especially more so now because I do perceive a lot of fake love as being at the center of this malevolence that you mentioned so like you know this whole thing about demonizing deal position saying that they're the heartless they haven't all of this and that I perceive that as a lot of fake love and I think that we have to keep in mind what true love is sometimes it looks ugly like in dealing with psychiatric patients maybe other countries are not as liberal as Canada but the gate results a lot more often you know psychiatric patients on the road for example in Greece where I'm from so but yeah that's kind of my comment that we need to focus a lot more on what real love is I think and not just the kind of love that he can put on a scale because I don't think they can put love on a scale so I've been talking and some of you noted this guy Jonathan pazzo who's a an orthodox carver and he started a YouTube channel and he's talking a lot about Orthodox issues and I'm pretty ignorant when it comes to Orthodox Christianity but from what I understand of it so far there's plenty to be learned so yeah I almost that's myself I just really came back to my faith two years ago basically that was the original Christianity then there was a Schism of 1054 between East and West because of the the complex that these in Krishna Christians have with the Pope and then after that you also had that schism internally within the West between Catholicism and and the Protestants so that's kind of like the big difference that Christianity also actually came from the East so I think that's why it's important that we look at the most ancient types because those were the ones that were closest to the original message so that's my question it's about atheism AG you might hear a lot of times people criticizing anybody that has any sort of release in a deity or God that you're just somebody that has an imaginary friend yeah you know like the the Heavenly Father that you have to adhere to that you have no well of your own you know then I there's also like wouldn't the counter argument be that okay so if I have a good relationship with my father and that's why I'm more likely to accept a higher deity then could it be that you as an atheist maybe you have conflict with your fault and that's why you're adverse to kind of submitting to a higher being that mechanically is your life well you're you're you're attempting a psychoanalysis of atheism you know and and there's many factors that go into atheism I would say that you could make that case in some situations but not in all I do think though and I think this is perhaps where your question is stemming from is that it's no fluke that at the same time that one of the consequences of the death of God that Nietzsche announced back in the late 18-hundreds is the all-out assault on masculinity that's occurring in our culture now and those things are associated and I do think that does have to do with a lack of faith in the masculine spirit and that's a very bad thing because that's a bad thing for everyone obviously because women have a partially masculine spirit and they have to put up with men and so to demolish that or to fail to nurture it which is certainly what's occurring is just a pathway to absolute disaster so yep Peterson so this is the type of question that you hate because it's in the category of wide why you believe what you believe and it's a type of question that makes you say if I have it right from the last time quote what the hell makes you think it's any of your business song right okay try to frame it properly okay and I'm asking this at lecture 10 of 12 and after having listened to quite a few hours of you here and elsewhere okay and in so in your second interview with transluminal media you lay out a few things I have some quotes here I'll skip them for brevity you get to the point where you're discussing the embodiment of the logos by christ as a historical figure and then you say quote is this resurrection real did his body resurrect I don't know in today's lecture you've alluded to the fact that there are states of consciousness that perhaps we don't know how to access anymore and let's say that I'm with you there let's say I'm with the idea that they're unknown there are unknown ways to get informations of the divine that the embodiment of the logos is associated with physiological transformations the upper limits of which are unknown and that we might currently classify as paranormal but to dumb it right back down to my level I'm asking about the guy commonly depicted with long hair nailed to a cross until that is a doorknob and all of this goes to the heart of the question of literalism and religious interpretation it goes to the heart of kind of you know what we're doing here at this lecture series are we examining the psychological significance of these stories or are we entertaining the possibility of these fantastical events I might be struggling with the concept but I haven't been able to square away and reconcile those statements by you so the question is on the on the question of the resurrection of Christ why is your answer to your own question I don't know instead of at the very least probably not well you're definitely right about me hating that question well I called this series two psychological significance of the biblical stories for a reason you know and the reason was that I'm partially qualified to talk about such things when I step outside of that then I'm not where I should be I don't think that see I don't think that this is I'm not going to get this right I can't get the words exactly right this isn't about what I believe personally it's partly because I don't know what I believe I don't know what I believe the world is a very strange place I've had some very strange experiences in it I don't think it's helpful for me to step outside my my jurisdiction and speculate precisely the easiest thing would be to say I think I said what I had to say today I don't think that we know what the upper limits of human possibility are I don't know what that means metaphysically what I do understand from the Gospels is that even the accounts of Christ's resurrection are complex and difficult to understand I think from reading you in large part that you can make a very strong case for the symbolic meaning of the death and resurrection I think it does stand for the capacity of the human logos to die and resurrect continually as it strives upward I'm not willing to say that that's all it means because I don't know what everything means and I don't know about the fundamental metaphysics of being like I do believe that it's accurate to construe being as a battleground between good and evil I believe that I believe that is the most accurate way of representing being it's not that most accurate way of representing the objective world that's not the same thing being is that set of experiences which we inhabit and that's only partly objective and it's not obviously reducible to the material not any straightforward way because we don't understand the material substrate of being at all you know it's and when we do attempt to understand it say at the quantum level we run into mysteries that that baffle the most the most intelligent of us and aware so I'm going to have to leave the question hanging but partly because partly because I don't know what I think but partly because there has to be a line between what I believe in what what I can communicate you know what you believe is beyond your capacity to articulate if you the most if the deepest levels of belief and I can only share with you what I have actually come to understand and there's things that I don't understand and that's definitely one of them I don't know how to draw a line between the symbolic significance of the biblical events say the symbolic and psychological significance of the biblical events and the metaphysics that's underneath them and I think you see the same thing in Jung because when Jung writes technically and formally he never talks about God he always talks about the image of God which is not the same thing the image of God would be your subjective experience of God it says nothing about the objective reality of God because your subjective experience can't say much about objective reality but even in you and you get this mix you know sometimes it's psychological but then he he makes a metaphysical move and I think that reflected also his the limits of his knowledge because Jung had profound revelatory experiences it was a very strange person you know and I I think so I think what's best for me is to stay on the ground that I am competent on and to say what I can say about the psychology and to reach beyond that briefly when it's necessary but other than that to leave it the hell alone till I understand it better assuming that I ever do so Because of these lectures I've been reading the Bible and obviously not finished but I'm fairly familiar with how it goes and I've been thinking about two parts of it in specific which is the story of Isaac and the crucifixion of Christ and particularly one of the things like that the Christ says on the cross which is my God my God why have you forsaken me and I've been trying to understand that because that's one hell of a thing for the Son of God to say now you think that would have been edited out yeah no seriously it's like why isn't that gone you know it's it's very inconvenient yeah and in well we haven't you haven't touched on the story of Isaac yet but there's this thing the cult typology which I'm sure you're aware of but basically the idea that what's going on in the Old Testament to serve the laying out of types for Christ and that Isaac is essentially a type of Christ because they have all these similarities and so I've been thinking about it in that context in thinking about the parallels between them in between Isaac and Christ and one of the things I also struck me was mostly the differences between either compressing the main difference it seems to me is sort of a difference in direction of sacrifice so the sacrifices of Abraham is Abraham sacrificing is son to God and then the sacrifice of Jesus is God sacrificing his son to mankind and I've been trying to understand basically how that works and in relation to the new and Western civilization for 2,000 years yeah well there is these transformations of sacrifice right that can did so the next thing that happens in these stories is that the circumcision circumcision starts to come in as a sacrifice and it seems to be something like the beginnings of replacement for sacrifice of animals it's you know there's this the psychologize ation of sacrifice so first it's pure external and acted out and then it becomes something that's more conceptual like it becomes embodied in the form of the circumcision and then it becomes more conceptual and that conceptual transformation keeps occurring and and it seems to well it culminates to some degree in this idea of the sacrifice of Christ who's who's God sacrificing his son to mankind but the sacrifice is much more complex than that right it's also Christ sacrificing himself to God and and I think that the the issue there is something like well let's say you're supposed to offer up the best that you have to God that's the sacrifice that's what happens with the high quality animals that that able sacrifice is okay but there's something better than the best that you own well what's that well part of it might be well the relationships you have with people are you willing to sacrifice them to pursue the highest good well then are you willing to sacrifice yourself or your son like your son might be that's a tough one I can understand the idea of sacrificing yourself better I'm still wrestling with this story of Isaac obviously because that's it's a complicated story and I do think it's reasonable to think about it as a form of foreshadowing at least the way the Bible is set up of course people who aren't Christian would agree with that but that that's fine um the idea that you would offer yourself as a sacrifice to God that seems to me to follow quite logically because well obviously you have nothing greater to give than the best of yourself right so you sacrifice yourself to the highest good and that's part of the man that's part of the way in which humanity is redeemed that makes sense to me that just seems like for me that's that's a pretty straightforward psychological truth the son issue that's that's a lot tougher thing to wrestle with because one of the things I was thinking with the with what Jesus says on the cross that one of the interpretations of that is basically that Jesus in that moment is human basically is not this not relative it's just Jesus the human right but that always kind of felt a little bit like avoiding the question to me because you can't just part it something like the Trinity and then say oh but in this moment that doesn't go right there doesn't count so but if we think about it in that way of like the difference in the direction of sacrifice and it seems to me then the sacrifice whoever is making the sacrifice Irv aims toward something so Abraham is sort of reaching for the divine when he sacrifices when he's going to sacrifice his son and so though I mean maybe God is reaching toward the human and so that would make some sense of that interpretation that Christ is only human in that moment right that that it's the sacrifice is accomplished and the reaching down is accomplished but I'm still I'll do a question what do I make of that because that's one into well I mean it's useful to have a problem like that because it gives you something to think about right and something to study further and it's it's it's a it's a major it's a major problem I mean the whole issue of well we could say or what's the relationship between the divine and the human which is obviously brought to the forefront and the idea of Christ right but it's a personal issue because part of the issue is what's the relationship between you as a finite entity and the transcendent infinity that surrounds you well there's some relationship because here you are and the transcendent infinity around you exists so there's a relationship the question is what is the relationship and and we don't know that and and it's dramatized in that story and so I mean partly the reason that there's so much conflict and confusion in that story is because it's trying to bring opposing things together right how can something be God and man at the same time just like the genie which is the root word of genius by the way the genie is this incredibly powerful force that can grant wishes right but it's constrained in this tiny little space there's an information there that for something to be real it has to straddle the divide between the finite and the infinite and that's what human beings do I think to some degree and that's dramatized in that story but it doesn't mean that we understand it I mean you know that sometimes you're going to feel that way when you're called upon to make a sacrifice you're going to feel that you've been betrayed by everything I mean the story set up that way right Christ is betrayed by tyranny he's betrayed by his best friends he's betrayed by his mortality like it's an archetypal story because he's innocent so the story can't be any worse that's why it's archetypal and I mean the story says to some degree that under such conditions even God himself would have doubts it's something like that and that's a real that's a powerful idea it's a very powerful idea so that's the best I can make out of that for now we have to stop so will so convene again in a week thank you very much. three difficult stories tonight and hopefully my plan is to get through all three of them so we'll see how that goes so we're going to talk about the story of sodom and gomorrah and then the story of the sacrifice of Isaac which is an extremely complicated complicated story and so we'll try to make some headway with that the story of Sodom and Gomorrah is plenty complicated - all right so what we established last week at least in part was this idea that the Abrahamic narratives are set up as punctuated epochs I suppose in Abraham's life and we were hypothesizing that you know you set out a goal for yourself in your life it's like a stage in your life you might say that and then when you run that goal to its end when that stage comes to an end then you have to regroup and orient yourself once again and I was making the case that that's a good time to make necessary sacrifices you know and part of that because as you move through your life you have to shed that which is no longer necessary and because otherwise it accretes around you and holds you down and you perish sooner than you should and I think that's in large part because if you don't dispense with your life as you move through it then the stress of all that undone business and all those unmade decisions turns into a kind of chaos around you and that chaos puts you in a state of psychophysiological emergency preparedness chronically and that just ages you and so it's necessary in some sense to stay light on your feet and also I think to renew your commitment to your aim upward and I believe that that's what the sacrificial routines in the Abrahamic stories dramatized I said already that these things are often first portrayed very dramatically and concretely before they become psychologists and we'll see because one of the things that happens tonight as well in these stories is that when God makes his covenant with Abraham this is the next part of the story it's also when the idea of circumcision is introduced into ancient Hebrew culture and others every bit of evidence that other cultures were utilizing circumcision beforehand so it wasn't necessarily a novel invention of the Abrahamic people but I see its introduction as a step on the road to the psychologize ation of the idea of sacrifice right first of all it's giving up something concrete and then second it's signified by the sacrifice of a part of the body instead of for the sake of the whole it's something like that it's dramatizing the idea that you have to give up a part of yourself for the sake of the whole and eventually well by modern times that becomes virtually completely psycho psychological and it's in its essence in that we all understand perhaps not as well as we should but at least well enough to explain it that it's necessary to make sacrifices to move ahead in life one of the themes that I'd like to explore tonight in relationship especially to the sacrifice of Isaac is that you know once humanity had established the idea that sacrifice was necessary to move ahead which is really it's a discovery of incalculable magnitude right the idea that the idea that you can give up something in the present and that will in some sense ensure a better future is an unbelievable achievement it's equivalent to the discovery of the future it's equivalent to the discovery of the utility of work like its importance can't be overstated okay so it took a long time for people figure this out animals haven't figured it out at all right we've figured it out and it's hard it's hard for people to make sacrifices because of course the present has a major grip on you as it should because in some way you live in the present so anyways there's the twin problem of getting the whole idea of sacrifice up and running and then figuring out exactly what it means but there's a problem that branches off that too or a two-fold problem so the hypothesis is that sacrifice is necessary to ensure the that the future is safe and secure and productive and positive and all of those things ok so then then a question immediate two questions immediately rise from that right one is well what's the proper sacrifice now we already talked about that a little bit with regards to Cain and Abel and one of the things we saw was that Cain's sacrifice whatever it was was wrong and Abel's was right Noah's seemed to be right Abraham seems to be right there is something about a sacrifice that can be correct there's something about a sacrifice that can be incorrect the question is what would be the maximally correct sacrifice so because that's an obvious question to arise from the mere observation that sacrifice is necessary okay if you're going to sacrifice and it's necessary well how is it that you would behave if you were going to do it really well if you're going to do it perfectly okay so that's question number one and then question number two might be well if the future can be better because of the sacrifice and sacrifices can vary in quality then how much better could this set the future be if your sacrifice was of the highest quality right there's a limit issue there and it the limit is something like well how good could your life be if you really got your act together and you gave up all the things that we're impeding you in your movement forward if you did that forthrightly and and and with with integrity and with seriousness with with dead seriousness and you tried to set your life right what is the upper limits with regards to how your life might lay itself out and I would say well we don't know the answer to that but I think that like the idea of something like the City of God or the kingdom of God on earth or the re-establishment of paradise something like that is the answer of the imagination to the court how good could the future be if sacrifice was optimized and those are archetypal questions right an archetypal question is a question that everyone asks whether they know it or not because sometimes you can act out a question an archetypical estin is a question that everyone asks and an archetypal answer is the answer that can't be made any better to that question so I can give you an example of that the reason that Christ's passion is an archetypal story is because it's a kind of limit right it's the worst possible set of things that can happen to the best possible person so it's a story that constitutes a limit it has nothing to do with the factual reality of the story that's a completely independent issue I'm speaking about this psychologically is that certain stories can exhaust themselves in a perfect form and that would be the archetypal form so that's the territory that we're going to wander around in a little bit today and we'll use the stories as anchors in thinking a lot about the Sodom and Gomorrah story because it has its classically associated with a biblical injunction against homosexuality and that's often how it's read I would say in particular by the more fundamentalist end of the Christian spectrum and I've thought about that a lot because it's pretty damn clear that the story of Sodom and Gomorrah has something to do with sexual and propriety but I've really come to the conclusion and it's very little to do with homosexuality so we'll see how that interpretation prevails as we walk through this tonight okay so we'll start with a bit of a recap from last week so Abraham's had had his last adventure and he's 90 years old ninety nine years old actually the Lord appeared to Abram and said unto him I am the Almighty God walk before me and be thou perfect well that's quite the command now Alexander McLaren who we talked about before it elaborated upon this slightly and this is what he had to say it's this is not precisely walking with God the idea of walking before God it is rather that of an act of life spent in continual consciousness of being naked and opened before the eyes of him to whom we have to give an account okay so that's that's an idea that's in keeping with the notion that what we're seeing an Abrahamic story is the call to adventure of the of man of the typical person right because your life in some sense is an adventure and I suppose the reason for that is that you're confronted by things that you cannot understand that you have not yet mastered there's a heavy price to be paid if you fail to conduct yourself appropriately and there's a large reward to be gained if you conduct yourself properly and so that pretty much defines an adventure story and God calls to Abraham and tells him to move out into the world to leave what he's familiar with to go into the strange lands of famine and tyranny and to find his place and that works out quite nicely for Abraham and so what that also means is that because Abraham is doing that consciously at least according to this interpretation that he's not naive in his in his determination to move forward you know I mean I've dealt with lots of people who have anxiety disorders you know and one thing about people who have anxiety disorders is they are not mysterious to me I understand it's no problem for me to understand why people have anxiety disorders or why they're depressed or why they have substance use problems the mystery to me is always why people don't have all of those things at once because everybody has a reason to be anxious in fact we have the ultimate reason to be anxious because we know that we're vulnerable and we know that we're going to die and how you cannot be anxious under those circumstances is a great mystery it's a massive mystery and the same thing applies with regards to depression and then the same thing applies to some degree with regards to drug and alcohol abuse because I said last week there's plenty of reasons to drown your consciousness in alcohol that's for sure we could refer to the aforementioned anxiety depression not least and so and the and the sorts of drugs that people are prone to take our chemicals that take the affective edge off the tragedy of life so so back to back to the issue of fear being Abraham is self-conscious that's what this commentary says but the thing is as he moves forward despite that he's self-conscious and he knows the danger but he moves forward despite that and that's actually the appropriate response in the face of actual non naive understanding of what constitutes life like if you're naive and you move forward it's like well what the hell do you know you know there's no courage in naivety because you don't know what there is to stop you you don't know what dangers you might apprehend but to be aware of what it is that your problem is so to be alert existentially let's say or to be fully self conscious means that you're perfectly aware of your limitations and how you might be hurt and then to make the decision to move forward into the unknown and the land of the stranger anyways that's the I would say that's one of the secrets to a good life and I can say that really without fear of contradiction I would I would say because the clinical literature on this is very very very clear what you do with people who are afraid and to some degree depressed but certainly anxious is you lay out what what they're anxious about first of all in in detail what is it that you're afraid of what might happen and then you decompose it into small problems hypothetically manageable problems and then you have the person expose themselves to this thing that they're afraid of and what happens isn't that they get less afraid that isn't what the clinical literature indicates exactly what happens instead is they get braver and that's not the same thing right cuz if you get less afraid it's like well the world isn't just dangerous as I thought it was you know silly me if you get braver that's not what happens what happens is the other world am world's just as dangerous as I thought or maybe it's even more dangerous than I thought but it turns out that there's something in me that responds to taking that on as a voluntary challenge and grows and thrives as a consequence and there's no doubt about this even the psychophysiological findings are quite clear if you if you can if you impose a stressor on two groups of people and on one group the stressor is imposed involuntarily and on the other group the stressor is picked up voluntarily the people who pick up the stress or voluntary voluntarily use a whole different psychophysiological system to deal with it they use the system that's associated with approach and challenge and not the system that's associated with defensive aggression and withdrawal and the system that is associated with challenges much more associated with positive and much less associated with negative emotion it's also much less hard on you because the the defensive posturing system the prey animal system man when that thing kicks in it's all systems are go for you you know you're the gas is pushed down to the are the pedals pushed down to the metal and the brakes are on you're using future resources that you could be storing for future time right now in the present to ready yourself for emergency so there's there's there's nothing simple or trivial at all about the idea of being called to move forthrightly forward into the strange and the unknown and there's a real adventure that's associated with that right so that's an exciting thing which is part of the reason why people travel and then also to see yourself as the sort of creature that can do that is willing to do that on a habitual basis is also the right kind of tonic for I hate this word for your self-esteem you know because the self-esteem has nothing to do with feeling good about yourself as I already mentioned there isn't necessarily reason why a priori you should just feel good about yourself but if you can view yourself acting in a courageous and forthright manner and encountering the world and trying to improve your lot and and and taking risks you know in a non naive way well then you have something that you can comfort yourself with at night when you're wondering what the whole damn point of is of your futile and miserable life and so and that's necessary because it's often the case that you wake up at 4:00 in the morning or at least sometimes the case that you wake up at 4:00 in the morning when things haven't been going that well and wonder just what the hell the point is of your futile and miserable life you have to have something real to set against that it can't be just rationalizations about how you know you're a valuable person among others even though that's true that's not good enough you need something that's more realistic to set it against that an observing courage in yourself is definitely one of the things that that that can help you sleep soundly at night when when things are destabilized a little bit around you so back to the covenant God tells Abraham me make my covenant between me and D and will multiply the exceedingly and Abram fell on his face and God talked with him saying as me behold my covenant my contract is with thee and thou shalt be a father of many nations neither shall thy name anymore be called Abram but thy name shall be called Abraham for a father of many nations have I made thee an abram means High father and Abraham father of a multitude and I'll make thee exceedingly fruitful and I will make nations of thee and Kings shall come out of thee and I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant to be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee and I will give unto thee and thy seed after thee the land wherein thou art a stranger all the land of canaan for an everlasting possession and I will be their God I love that line really the line about the land where you are a stranger you know and everything that happens in the Bible almost everything that happens in these more archaic stories in particular is laid out geographically the metaphor is Geographic so you move to a land that you haven't yet occupied maybe that's full of strangers and then the land is what's granted to you but it's perfectly reasonable to think about this from the perspective from a more abstract perspective it's much more relevant to modern people with our incredibly complex societies you know it's definitely the case that if you go into the land of the stranger which is exactly what you do when you try out any new endeavor right when you start a new job or when you start a new educational enterprise or when you start a new relationship doesn't matter you're out there in unexplored territory like the physical geography is the same but we don't live in in the physics in the spatial world only we live in the temporal spatial world and what that means is that the same place can be different at a different time and maybe it can be completely different and so if you're in your house but you have a new person in your house while your house is new for all intents and purpose because the territory surrounding that new person is the territory of the foreigner essentially and the same thing happens to you when you start a new job and you'll find that when you start a new job especially if you stretched yourself a little bit beyond your zone of comfort that you very much feel like an imposter right when you're first there and then the question is well how do you master that and the answer to that seems to be well it seems fairly straightforward if the place that you're in has any degree of possibility if it isn't inhabited by demons so to speak the best way to act is to lift your aim upward an attempt to get your act together and to tell the truth and to live a meaningful life and to do difficult things all of that and that is the best way of mastering a new territory and you know I all probability the degree to which you're able to act that out is precisely proportionate to the degree to which you're going to become a master in that territory and not sort of thinking having a lot faster than people think you know it's it's really quite remarkable how fast you can move forward if you can establish yourself somewhere and prove yourself useful assuming that you're around people to whom proving yourself useful actually matters like I know perfectly well that you can end up in an employment situation where you're punished for your virtues right in which case you should just get the hell out of there and really really you get out of there and you go find somewhere where if you work hard and do what you're supposed to do you're actually going to be rewarded right because that's not a workplace that's hell and you should just leave there so and God said unto Abraham thou shalt keep my covenant therefore thou and thy seed after thee in their generations this is my covenant which he shall keep between me and you and thy seed after thee every man child among you shall be circumcised that's a mystery they're like why that particular right what's dramatic I mean it certainly it certainly affects a man where he's most concerned to be affected there's something like that and so it's it's a sacrifice that has a certain I would say a certain degree of unforgettable 'ti that would be the first thing and a certain degree of pain and threat that goes along with it so it's not nothing that's the thing now you can argue and I think there is an argument a case to be made about whether or not in the modern world circumcision is a reasonable is something reasonable to inflict on infants I don't want to have that conversation at all but I don't think that's relevant to this particular issue because we're talking about something different we're talking about humanity's attempt to reconcile themselves to the fact that something has to be given up in order something else to happen and to try to really work through that idea and to make it into a psychological reality and so far what we've seen in the biblical stories is that when you make a sacrifice it's not really something personal or psychological right it's something external and dramatic you give up something that you own you don't give up something that you are or that's part of you and it's actually more of a sacrifice to give up something that's a part of you or something that you are than to give up something that you own I mean it's a subtle distinction between because in some sense the distinction between what you own and what you are is subtle right I mean it's not overwhelmingly subtle but but people identify with their possessions and they need to because otherwise they wouldn't care for them and they need their possessions in order to live so their possessions are in some sense integral to them but this transformation here of an act that was external and associated essentially with possessions to something that was actually at least part of the body brings it much closer to it brings it much closer to the to the to the individual as a psychological reality it's something like that and you shall circumscribe is circumcised the flesh of your foreskin and it shall be a token of the Covenant betwixt me and you it's also a permanent marker you know and I've read a fair bit about practices like tattooing and body scarification you know which is those are very very common practices right they're human universals actually no matter where you go around the world you mean you see a couple of things first of all almost without exception people wear clothing and sometimes it's relatively minimal clothing but but it's and often it's more decorative than protective but it's almost inevitably clothing and the other thing that you see is that people do scarify and tattoo themselves and they do that in some manner to catalyze their identity right they're trying to transform themselves from a generic person in some sense to a person that's been designed by their own hand it's something like that they're it's a marker of developing identity and some of it seems to be catalyzed with pain you know that modern people who tattoo and I'm not saying that I'm in favor of tattooing because actually I'm not but that but that my own particular bias and if you have a tattoo that's fine with me I'm also not saying that there's anything wrong with it but one of the things you do see what we the people who have it to tattoo do report is a couple of things is that the pain is actually necessary and that the pain is actually something that seems to establish something like a memory so well it's a memory because of the pain because you plenty well remember things that hurt but it's also a memory because it's actually etched on you right it's not something that you can just abandon and forget and so a circumcision is exactly the same thing it's like you don't forget it because it's part of you and so it makes a good token for a covenant and so that seems to be the rationale here from from speaking from a psychological perspective it's to indicate as well that the the damn thing that's happening is serious and I think also that was the case with the earlier sacrifices of animals it's like modern people don't do this like you don't know how serious you would take a vow if you sacrificed a goat in your backyard you know it's actually a very dramatic thing to do you know you think about it as primitive and perhaps it is archaic and and and no doubt it is but it's also to take the life of something and to spill its blood that's no joke that's something you remember especially if you haven't done it before and we actually don't know what we would need to do in order to take some things seriously you know because we all do things like make new year's resolutions about how we're going to be better people and we don't do it and the reason for that at least in part is because we don't know how to make the sacrifice sufficiently bloody let's say so that we remember that it's necessary right we don't take it with seriousness we don't think I should quit smoking because I'm going to die and we don't think through what that means like coughing your lungs out for three months in a hotel bed well your entire family is like a half repulsed and horrified and sorrow stricken at the fact that this has happened far too early you know we won't make that real enough to make it serious and serious and without that seriousness we won't do it so there's something to be said for rituals of seriousness and I think this is one of them and he that is eight days shall be circumcised among you every man child in your generations he that is born in the house or bought with money of any stranger which is not a dice seed this is from Charles John Ellicott who was bishop of Gloucester the fitness of circumcision to be a sign of entering into a covenant and especially into one to which children were to be admitted consisted in its being a representation of a new birth by putting off the old man and the dedication of the new man unto holiness it's like a baptism that's right that's that's what's that's what's echoed there and of course baptism is returned to the pre cosmogonic chaos because that's what the water indicates and return to this source of life and and then the renewal that comes along with it so it's the it's it's it's a sacrificial idea in some sense that if there is to be a new you that the old you has to dissolve has to return to the solution from which it emerged initially and to reconstitute itself and so there's an echo of that idea here the flesh was cast away that the spirit might grow strong and the change of name and Abram and Sarai was typical of this change of condition they had been born again and so must again be named and though women could need be admitted directly into the could not indeed be admitted directly into the Covenant yet they shared in its privileges by virtue of their constant annuity to the men who were as sponsors for them and that Sarai changes her name equally with her husband well you could make a case and and anthropological observers have made this case to that women undergo a sufficiently a set of sufficiently radical psychophysiological transformations merely as a consequence of being part being feminine in nature such that the additional rituals of transformation that might be necessary for men aren't necessary and one of those might be menstruation because that's a pretty dramatic transformation and there has been some indication that circumcision is like a male it's like the male equivalent of menstruation something like that because of the blood that's involved and because of the locale and then of course the same thing is the case with women when they give birth because that's a particularly dramatic thing as I just witnessed because my daughter just had a baby this week so thank God for that recent investigation this is from the Cambridge Bible for school and colleges which if you want to read it is only 58 volumes recent investigation is not tended to support the theory that circumcision has any connection with primitive child sacrifice nor again that it took its origin from hygienic motives apparently it represents the dedication of the manhood of the people to God in the history of Israel it has survived as the symbol of the people belonging to Jehovah through his special election this corporeal sacrament remained to the Israelite when when every other tie of religion or race had been severed the other thing that that I read about in relationship to this idea of the multi-generational covenant had something to do because God told Abraham to include all of the people of his household into this covenant and and that that that really meant that he was establishing it a territory of ethics around them like the ark except the psychological equivalent of the ark right so it was it was a spiritual or psychological or ethical territory that everyone who was of that household was required to occupy or obliged or perhaps privileged to occupy and there was also an injunction to Abraham with regards to his children which was that as he had established a covenant with God which we could say is something like his decision to to aim as high as possible and to live properly as a consequence it's more than that but it's something like that that he also was under the supreme moral obligation to share that with his with the other men in his family especially as children and so and so I think there's also a call here to adopting a sacred the sacred responsibility in relationship to children that has to do with ensuring that they understand how to take their place in the world and I think that that's definitely something very much worth considering especially given the emphasis in the Noah's story in the story of Noah that Noah had his that his generations were perfect right as I said before it wasn't merely that he had walked with God that he had perfected his own relationship with the divine let's say with the transcendent and I want to make that concrete which is a strange thing to do with the transcendent I mean people ask me all the time about what I believe and of course that's what I'm trying to explain while I'm talking but but but and and many people of course are skeptical about the idea of anything transcendent and and and say transcendent and eternal but that can also be addressed from a psychological perspective because I would say well if you have an ideal of any sort how is that not transcendent it transcends you that's the first thing and it doesn't exist in reality it exists in a place of possibility and believe me man we treat places of possibility as if they're real because people will call on you you know about your possibility in your potential they'll say to you you're not manifesting your full potential and you might say well what do you mean by that potential it doesn't exist it isn't here now you can't measure it or weigh it you can't get a grip on it and they'll say don't rationalize you know perfectly well what I mean when I'm talking about your potential and so we could and you do and everyone does and everyone knows exactly what that means and so that's a metaphysical reality that will immediately accept as real and also castigate ourselves for not fulfilling and others to like because you're just not happy when the people around you especially if you love them don't fulfill their potential you really feel that something has gone wrong and so there's a transcendent reality and potential and then when you hypothesize an ideal that you might pursue which you always do if you pursue anything right because to pursue something means you don't already have it you're pursuing something that doesn't exist you're probably not pursuing something that's worse than what you already have because why the hell would you sooo it right that's completely counterproductive so in in the mere fact of your pursuit you you pause it a transcendent reality that you can that you can that you can journey towards that's more valuable than the reality that you have now that's predicated in some sense on something like an eternal Verity or an eternal truth it partakes in the ideal and so we have an relationship with the transcendent and you might say well that doesn't mean you have to personify the transcendent say as Jehovah you know the God the Father but there's also some damn good reasons for doing that because one of the things that I've realized thinking through this covenant idea and also the sacrifice idea is that the idea that the future is a judgmental father is a really really good idea you know because you think about what the future is in part I mean the future is however the natural world is going to lay itself out over the next endless amount of time that isn't what I mean I think more about your future now mostly your future is the future that you're going to negotiate with other people but they're going to be other people in the future and some of those people are going to be you in the future and family members in the future and so what's happening right now is that if you make the sacrifices properly then you're actually pleasing that future set of people and that future set of people is definitely going to serve as a judge that's exactly what it does that's precisely what it does and so you might say well it was the brilliant imagination of mankind that hypothesized that the best way to think about the social group including the family but also including you as your future self was to consider that you live in relationship with a future father who's a judge it's like yes that's exactly right now is it right right or is it psychologically right well it's at least psychologically right and you know one of the things I've learned about the biblical stories is that to say that they're psychologically right doesn't exhaust the ways in which they're right but it at least gives rational modern people who are skeptical properly so a better way of getting a grip on them so and the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised that soul shall be cut off from his people he had broken my covenant so it's a serious contractual relationship now I was thinking about how to understand this and I remembered this old story which I'm going to read to you about a monkey so there's an old impossibly apocryphal story about how to catch a monkey that illustrates this set of ideas very well first so goes the story you have to find a large narrow neck jar just barely wide enough in diameter for a monkey to put his hand inside and then you have to fill the jar up with rocks so that it's too heavy for the monkey to carry away and then you scatter some treats around the jar that are attractive to monkeys and close to the jar and then you put a few of those treats inside the jar and so that's the first part of the trick and then the second part of the trick is the monkey comes along and gathers up the treats and then puts his hand in the jar and grabs the treats that are in there but it's narrow necked and so once the monkey puts his hand in there and grabs the goodies then he can't get his hand out of the damn jar and so then you can just come along and pick up the monkey and like too bad for the monkey rights like he shouldn't let go of what he had so that something terrible didn't happen to him but that isn't what the monkey will do because he can't sacrifice the part for the hole and there's something about the circumcision story that's about that it's about sacrificing the part to save the whole and I mean there's an echo of that in the New Testament if I remember correctly I believe it's I believe this is correct although it might not be where Christ tells his disciples to pluck out their eye if it offends them seems like a very dramatic you know piece of advice but it's it's partaking of the same idea which is that now if there's something holding you back we'll see this when we get to the story of law - if there's something holding you back even if it's beer to you you have to let it go you seriously have to let it go because there isn't anything more important than progressing forward and cheap sympathy cheap empathy cheap nostalgia none of that is sufficient none of that will work because the consequences of not putting things together immediately are dire and there's no time to wait and God said unto Abraham as for Sarai thy wife thou shalt not call her name Sarai but Sarah shall be her name my princess that was suraíh Sarah is mother of Nations and I will bless her and give thee a son also of her yea I will bless her she will be a mother of Nations kings of people shall be of her then a hebrew ham fell on his face and laughed and said in his heart shall a child be born unto him that is a hundred years old he's got a lot of doll I would say I mean there's God talking to him any laughs you know but that's okay that's he's a courageous guy and that's what people are like and and shall Sarah that is 90 years old bear and Abraham said unto God oh that Ishmael might live before thee and God said Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed and thou shalt call his name Isaac and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant and with his seed after him and as for Ishmael I've heard thee behold I have blessed him and will make him fruitful and will multiply him exceedingly 12 Prince's shall he beget and I will make him a great nation now what does this mean this is this is a miraculous story in some sense right because well Sarah it's what the Isaac want or what Abraham wants most is to have a son but it looks like it's pretty much impossible and I I think what the story is attempting to indicate is something like god only knows what will happen to you if you put your house in order certainly things that you do not currently regard as possible will happen and the more you put your house in order the more things that you regard as impossible will happen and it might be the case that if you put your host together sufficiently things that were of miraculous impossibility would happen to you well and there's no way of knowing until you try it but there's no way of being sure that it's not the case unless you do and my experience has been that I don't mean just personally I mean that the world is a remarkable and mysterious place and the relationship between the nature and structure of the world and your actions is indeterminate they may be more tightly related than you think and I don't know how to square that with the fact that well you're obviously in a mortal body and constrained by all sorts of serious constraints and none of that none of that can be trivially overcome and I don't really understand how there can be that seriousness of mortal constraint and the infinite potential that also seems to characterize human beings all at the same time but then I don't really understand anything about the nature of reality so that's just one more mystery to add to the pile so but my covenant I will establish his Isaac which share a Sarah shall bear unto thee at the set time next year and he left off talking with him and God went up from Abraham and Abraham took Ishmael his son and all that were born in this house and all that were bought with his money every male among the men of Abraham's house and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame as God had said unto him that must have been an interesting conversation that's I mean really this is what God told you to do it like okay and Abraham was ninety years old and nine when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin and Ishmael was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the cell same day was Abraham circumcised and his son and all the men of his house ORN in the house and bought with money of the stranger were circumcised with him all right so that's the renewal of the Covenant that's the next part of the story that's the circumcision that's the circumcision story and as I said it seems to indicate to me something about seriousness of intent something about the responsibility that Abraham determines to take for everyone that's part of his household the psychological increasing psychological transformation of the idea of sacrifice the necessity of doing something memorable and the the what would you call it the end the utility of rekindling the aims of your highest values when you come to the end of an epoch in your life when you have to take stock again right you take stock of yourself that's really what that phrase means to take stock is to take stock of yourself and to decide ok well what should move forward in time with me and what should be let go as if it's Deadwood and the more Deadwood that you let go of and burn off when you have the opportunity the less it accretes around you here's something interesting about forest fires you know people have been trying to prevent forest fires for a long time especially that damn bear smokey right he's trying to prevent forest fires and so because forest fires burn up the forest and that can't be good but here's what happens if you don't let forest fires burn is that well forests collect a lot of dry branches right because tree branches guy and wood falls on the forest floor and collects and so the amount of flammable material keeps increasing with time and that's not so bad if it's wet but if the amount of flammable material is increasing and it gets really dry and then it burns then you have a real problem the forest fire can burn so hot that it burns root does pop soil right off in which case you don't have a forest at all anymore you just have a desert and lots of trees are evolved to withstand forest fires of a certain intensity and some won't even release their seeds unless there's been a fire and so a little bit of fire at the right time can stop everything from burning to the ground and that's also a really useful insight a metaphorical insight into the nature of sacrifice right it's also a lot easier to let go of something when you're deciding to let go of it because you've decided yourself that it's you're done with that it's a weak part of you it needs to disappear you do that yourself it's much better and much easier than it is if it's taken away from you forcibly in which case you're very much likely to fight it these other there's another interesting thing here a motif that runs the entire Bible it's a very very powerful motif and it's partly associated with this idea of walking with or walking before God and you know in the New Testament Christ says something like thy father's will be done and he means that that will should be done through him and so I can't I won't build a state that's exactly right but it's something like this you know a lot of what people regard as their own personalities and and are proud of about their own personalities aren't their own personalities at all they're useless idiosyncrasies that differ them differentiate them trivially from other people but they have no value in and of themselves they're more like quirks I remember once I was trying to teach a particularly stubborn student about how to write and she had written a number of essays in in University and got universally walloped for them and the reason for that was she couldn't write really at all she was really really bad at writing and so I was sitting down with her trying to explain to her what she was doing wrong and she was being very annoying about it very recalcitrant very very unwilling to listen that was a pearls before swine thing you know and at one point she said it I can write perfectly well this university professors just don't like my style and I could see all my hands creep towards her neck yeah well then I'd be funny if it wasn't true but was also true you know and I thought what the hell's with you you can't even write and you think you have a style and normally do you think ya know not knowing how to write is not a style that's the other point right and so you know she she instead of humbling herself which was necessary and okay right cuz she was a new University students like of course you don't know how to write when were you gonna learn in school I don't think so so she had this you know this this this style issue and it it just it just didn't go anywhere at all and so now let's see I lost my train of thought and telling you tell me all those jokes oh yes in terms of above letting things burn off yeah well so she was proud of her insufficiency that's arrogance right that's not humility it's self-deception and arrogance to be proud of your insufficiency that's a very foolish thing and that means to cling to the parts of you that are dead okay now there's this idea that runs through the Bible I think as a whole that okay I'll tell you another little side story here I was reading about Socrates today and I was reading about Socrates trial you know he was tried by the Athenians for corrupting for failing to worship the correct gods and corrupting the youth of Athens by like teaching them stuff and asking them questions you know which is great way to corrupt people and so he knew the trial was coming and Athens wasn't a very big place only on about 25,000 people everybody knew everybody everybody knew who the powerful guys were and everybody including Socrates knew that the trial was a warning do you like get out of town right we're going to put you on trial in six months and the potential penalty is best got that it's like so so Socrates had a chat with his compatriots and they were contemplating fair means and foul to set up a defense for him so that he could or to leave so that he could not be tried and put to death and he decided that he wasn't going to do that and he also decided that he wasn't going to even think about his defense and he said why this is quite an interesting thing he said why he told one of his friends that he had this voice in his head a daemon a spirit something like that that he always listened to and that that was one of the reasons he was different from other people because he always listened to this thing it didn't tell him what to do but it told him what not to do it always told him what not to do and if it told him not to do something then he didn't do it if he was speaking and the little voice came up and said no then he shut up and he tried to say something else and he was very emphatic about this and he said that when he tried to plan to evade the trial or even to mount his own defence the voice came up and said no don't bother with it and he thought well what would he what the hell do you mean by that like there's a trial coming and I'm going to be put to death and well he eventually concluded that he was an old guy you know the next 10 years he was in his 70s perhaps the next 10 years weren't going to be that great for him he got a chance maybe the gods were giving him a chance just to bow out you know to put his affairs in order to say goodbye to everyone to avoid that last descent into catastrophe which might have been particularly painful for a philosopher and to and to walk off the world on his own terms something like that the point I'm making with that is that Socrates attended to this internal voice that at least told him what not to do and then he didn't do it and of course Socrates was a very remarkable man and we still hear about him today and we know that he existed and all of those things and so back to the back to the walking with God idea you know as you elevate your aim you create a judge at the same time right because the new ideal which is an ideal you even if it's just an ideal position that you might occupy even if it's still conceptualized in that concrete way that becomes a judge because it's above you right and then you're you're terrified of it maybe why you might be afraid when you go start a new job right because your this thing is above you and you're terrified of it and it judges you and that's useful because that's the judge that you're creating by formulating the idea tells you what's useless about yourself and then you can dispense with it and you want to keep doing that and then every time you make a judge that's more elevated then there's more useless you that has to be dispensed with and then if you recreate an ultimate judge which is what the archetypal imagination of humankind has done say with the figure of Christ because if Christ is nothing else he is at least the archetypal perfect man and therefore the judge you have a judge that says get rid of everything about yourself that isn't perfect of course that's also what Abraham that's also what God tells Abraham right he says to be perfect to pick an ideal that's high enough and you can do this the thing that's interesting about this I think is you can do it more or less on your own terms you have to have some collaboration from other people but you don't have to pick an external ideal you can pick an ideal that fulfills the role of ideal for you you can say okay well if things could be set up for me the way I need them to be and if I could be who I needed to be what would that look like and you can figure that out for yourself and then instantly you have a judge and I also think that's part of the reason people don't do it right why don't why don't people look up and move ahead an answer is well you know you start formulating an ideal you formulate a judge it's pretty easy to feel intimidated in the face of your own ideal that's what happens to Kane vs Abel for example then it's really easy to destroy the ideal instead of to try to pursue it because then you get rid of the judge but it's way better lower the damn judge if it's too much like if your current ambition is crushing you you know then maybe you're playing the tyrant to yourself and you should cap down your ambitions not get rid of them by any stretch of the imagination but at least put them more reasonably within your grasp you don't have to leap from point one to point 50 and one leap right you can do it incrementally but I really like this idea I think it's a profound idea that the process of recapitulating yourself continually is also the process of it's a phoenix-like process right you're shedding and all those elements of you that are no longer worthy of the pursuits that you're that you're valuing and then I would say the idea here is that as you do that you shape yourself ever more precisely into something that can withstand the tragedy of life and that can act as a as a beacon to the world that's the right way of thinking about it maybe first to your friends and then to your family it's like it's a hell of a fine ambition and there's no reason that it can't happen you know every one of you knows people who are really bloody useful in a crisis and people that you admire right those are all you can think of all those people as you admire that you admire us partial incarnations of the archetypal Messiah that's exactly right and the more that that manifests itself at any given person then the more generally useful and admirable that person is in a multitude of situations and we don't know the limit to that but people can be unbelievably good for things you know it's really something to behold so that's what God tells Abraham okay so the next story is about Abraham and these angels Ames will show up on his doorstep and this is part of the story of Sodom and Gomorrah but I don't think as I said this story is generally read as if it's about homosexuality but I don't think it is here I think it's about two things primarily one is how do you treat the strange so the strangest strange things and strange ideas and strange people and strangers right it's all about it it's that which is not you it's like the strange lands that God asked Abraham to move out into how do you interact with this strange and here here's one possible rule because you could say to yourself well what what do I want to make friends with more where do I want to be more comfortable do I want to be more comfortable with that which I already know and so that would be the circumscribed territory that you've already mastered or do I want to be comfortable with all those things I don't know and then the right answer is that you should want to be comfortable with all those things that you don't know because there is a bloody lot of things that you don't know and if you can be a Sojourner among what you don't know well then you're so protected because well you're going to go lots of places where you don't know and you're going to be able to manage it so you want to be you want to be that person that can act where they don't know and so also what happens with with Abraham well he's at home and these angels show up now we don't know whether they're angels or men precisely because well as this part of the story reads as the Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day so he's not a visionary state by the by all appearances and he lifted up his eyes and looked and lo three men stood by him there's real ambivalence in the story about the men are the three men are the three angels are the two angels in God it's all mixed up in the story so we won't clarify that we'll leave it ambiguous and I think the ambiguity is important because you don't know who the stranger is when you encounter them and it depends on whether you're thinking about it in the normative manner or if you're thinking about it in the transcendent manner because with each person that you meet well they're just a person that's one way of thinking about it and and then they're the person that you know or they're the person as they choose to reveal themselves to you and people keep themselves shielded but then they're also something of great metaphysical potential right and you might say well do you believe that and I would say well yes you believe it because you expect a lot from people generally speaking and are not happy if they betray you but more importantly our entire culture is predicated on the idea that each person has an indefinite intrinsic worth and I'm not talking about self-esteem I'm talking about something like the what would what would you say it the implicit presupposition in our legal structure that no matter who you are even if you're a murderer even if you're a condemned murderer that there's something about you that's of transcendent value that has to be respected by the law by the law and by other people right and so that's that's a remark net and you might say well do I believe that and answer that is well yak it out because you follow the law and it's not an easy thing to pull out of the law it's kind of the idea that you have intrinsic natural rights and you don't pull that out of our law man without having the whole thing fall down and I think the whole idea that you have intrinsic natural rights is predicated on something like the biblical hypothesis that human beings have a logos nature and that we are involved in the speaking forth of being and as beings who are involved in this speaking forth of being there's something about us that has to be respected by ourselves in relationship to ourselves by ourselves in relationship to other people but even more strangely by ourselves in relationship to even to criminals even to vicious criminals you can't remove that transcendent element and that's that to me that's also a mirror a miracle of conceptualization because who the hell is going to think that up right even the most vicious of murderers has a touch of the transcendent that needs to be respected of all the ideas that are unlikely that's going to top the list and of course without that you you have a very barbaric legal system right because no one is protected as soon as you make a mistake then you're in the Damned then you have no rights whatsoever and that isn't what happens in the West which isn't an absolutely amazing thing so anyways Abraham is a master of the stranger that's one way of thinking about it he knows what to do when strangers come along and he opens his he opens himself up to them and I would say he does that we know he's not a naive guy Abraham right he's no weakling a couple of stories ago he took a big army and you know went and harassed a bunch of Kings and took his nephew back he's he's a tough guy and so if strangers show up and he welcomes them it's not because he couldn't do otherwise he could certainly do otherwise and it's not because he isn't aware of what people can be like he's perfectly aware of what people can be like but he determines to take a particular attitude towards them and that is to welcome them and so and why would you do that and I think the answer to that is you hold out your hand entrust to someone and you evoke the best from them if that's their to be given so it's an act of courage it's like it's it isn't me meeting you exactly not exactly it's more like the transcendent part of me making a gesture that allows the transcendent part of you to step forward and that happens all the time it happens all the time in normative discourse you know this perfectly well because sometimes you can have a real casual conversation with someone that just goes nowhere right it's just shallow as can be or now and then you can actually make contact with someone right and you're both I would say enlightened and ennoble by the conversation and that's a de we would call that a deep conversation first for some reason because we made a deep connection whatever that means it means well it certainly means that it's not shallow we're not sure about what these metaphor means but it means that it reaches deep inside of you it's something like that you make direct person-to-person contact and those sorts of conversations are replenishing that that's the right way to think about it they genuinely are and I think that's because they provide you with that bread that's not Material bread and that's the information that you need to to thrive and to put yourself together and so it does matter how you meet someone and it does matter how you treat them when you first meet them and it's amazing I've learned to do this at least in part partly because I'm a clinical psychologist I've learned how to talk to people very rapidly and I have the most amazing adventures with people in cabs and when I travel because I'll talk to them directly right away and they'll tell me the wildest stories and show me the craziest things because I'm actually interested in what they have to say and I'm not afraid well I'm somewhat afraid but I'm not I'm not sufficiently afraid to have that stop me and I'm acting on the presupposition that the person has something of great interest to reveal and that's a very useful thing to know too because one of the things that's really cool about people and you really learn this as the clinical psychologist is that if you can get people talking they're so damn interesting you can hardly stand it you know because they have these idiosyncratic experiences that are only theirs right they're only theirs personally no one else could tell the story and that's the kind of stories that you want to hear and when they tell you those stories you learn something you didn't know and so what that means is that you can treat the landscape of strangers as an endless vista of places to learn things you didn't know and if you know enough so that you're satisfied with your life and everything has ceased to be a tragedy around you well then you could be comfortable in your circumscribed domain of totalitarian knowledge let's say but if you're if your life is insufficient and you're suffering more than you want to and everything isn't what it should be then you need to look where you haven't looked for what you don't have and then you can look outside beyond you and then you can make friends with what you don't understand and that's a huge part of what this story is about because what happens is that Abraham welcomes the men God angels and treats them very well and reaps a tremendous benefit as a consequence and then well then the story reverses and we end up in Sodom and Gomorrah where the same angels sojourn and they're treated terribly and all hell breaks loose and so that's what the story is about it's not fundamental now there's a there's a sexual impropriety thing going on that I'm also going to delve into but I don't think that's the critical issue in the story the critical issue in the story is how do you act in the face of the stranger you know there's a statement in the New Testament Christ says something like when you when you do something to the least of people you do it to me him right and that's a very difficult statement to understand too but it's something like it's something reminiscent of the requirement to keep the idea of the transcendent reality of the person in mind at the same time you keep their proximal reality in mind to have to have your mind in two places at the same time when you're talking to people you know I learned from a friend of mine in Montreal who is very socially sophisticated in some ways whenever went in whenever he went in to us always like going shopping with him and whenever he went into a store and he talked and he had an interaction with a clerk the first thing he would do is have an interaction with the clerk and he wouldn't have an interaction with the role of the clerk he'd like look at the person sort of take stock of the fact that they were there and then asked them something genuine about their job or their store how they were doing like going to a conversation right away and he didn't get personal about it because that can be intrusive right you have to be very sophisticated to do this but he did indicate to the person that he was there at least in part for the good that could be done between them it's something like that and then the person would be ridiculously helpful you know and and so then you know if people mistreat you you see this with antisocial kids it's a very tragic thing to see because if you're an antisocial child by the time you're about 4 you're very hostile and distrustful to people and so you'd like a growling puppy and if you're a growling puppy you can not to get petted you're more likely to get kicked and if you're a growling puppy and you get kicked and you have even more reason to grow and that's sort of the story of antisocial kids if they're not well socialized by the time they're four and they're more on the aggressive side then they alienate themselves from the community and all they get is rejection well and then they look at the rejection and they think well to hell with humanity you know and you wonder they think that but but the part of the catastrophe is is that they get what they evoke and I'm not saying it's their fault precisely but it doesn't matter that's still what happens and so you might ask yourself if you're not getting from people what you need there is some possibility that you're not approaching especially if this happens to you repeatedly across people and this is a virtual certainty if it happens to you repeatedly across people especially if you have the same bad experience with people it's not them it's you I would say three is the limit if something happens to you once you write it off if it happens to you twice it's like you open your eyes but you write it off but it happens to you three times it's probably you or it's the rest of the world better it's you because you're not going to change the rest of the world and he lifted up his eyes and looked and lo three men stood by heaven when he saw them he ran to meet them from the tent door and bowed himself to the ground and said my lord if now I have found favor in thy sight pass not away I pray thee from thy servant let a little water I pray you be fetched and wash your feet wash your feet take the dust from your feet extract yourself out from your journey write and sit and I'll fetch a morsel of bread and comfort ye your hearts and after that you can pass on for therefore are you come to your servant and they said so do as thou hath said and Abraham hastened unto the tent into the tent unto Sarah and said make ready quickly three measures of fine meal knead it and make cakes upon the hearth powerful call to hospitality here and abraham ran unto the herd and fetched a calf tender and good and gave it to a young man and he hasted to dress it and he took butter and milk and the calf which he had dressed and said it before them and he stood by them under the tree and they did eat some commentary from here Hebrews 13 to be not forgetful to entertain strangers for thereby some have entertained angels unawares this is a commentary from Matthew Henry with a nonconformist minister and author cheerful and obliging manners in showing kindness are great ornaments to piety though our condescending lord vouchsafe has not personal visits to us yet still by his Spirit he stands at the door knocks when we're inclined to open he deigns to enter by his gracious consolations he provides a rich feast of which we partake with him this is from revelations 3:20 behold I stand at the door and knock and If any man hear my voice and opened the door I will come in to him and will sup with him and he with me well a hyperlink nature of those quotes is quite obvious there's 10 or 15 things being said at the same time right one is a reference to the idea that if you ask for something it will be given to you right it was a very strange idea but I like that idea a lot and I believe my in my experience that has been true if it was that I wanted what I was asking for because that's the real issue right because the question is if you want something what does it mean to want it and what it means is to sacrifice whatever is necessary to get it because otherwise you don't want it and so there's an equation here and I'm not claiming its ultimate accuracy but the equation is something like you don't want it unless you're willing to sacrifice for it and if you don't want it you're not going to get it because you're scattered but if you do want it and you make the proper sacrifices then god only knows what might happen and that's a see one of the things I really like about the existential philosophers is their emphasis on personal responsibility you know that many of them had an emphasis on the role that people had in shaping their own destiny the exists for the existentialists and I think this was a consequence of the religious substructure of philosophical thinking it was self-evident that life was tragic and bitter but and then fair enough but that isn't where it ended the the next issue was well there are better in ways better and worse ways of dealing with that and the better way of dealing with the fact that life is tragic and bitter is to pause it the self you could be and live authentically in relationship to that and then the next issue and something is something Kierkegaard talked about particularly when he talked about the necessity of being a night of faith is that the thing is and this is I think part of the light part of life that's the intractable adventure no one can take the adventure of life away from you that that's they can't deal with good advice for example because no one can demonstrate to you that if you straight yourself out a name it what you want and make the proper sacrifices that your life will turn out in the manner that you might want it to turn out it isn't in anyone else's purview to make that judgment the only person that can possibly figure that out is you it's something that can't be stolen from you I would say it's your destiny it's a destiny that cannot be stolen from you and you can forego it you can say well I'm not willing to put in the effort because what if I fail well first of all if you don't put in the effort you will fail because life is hard and it takes everything out of you to do it properly so you will fail and if you make the proper sacrifices you might fail that's why I like the ambiguity and the story of Cain and Abel because we're never really told why God rejects Cain's offerings there's hints that Cain maybe isn't doing as good a job as he should and he certainly gets bitter about it but there's no smoking pistol it doesn't say well Cain is a bad guy he made terrible sacrifices so God rejected him you never know Cain might have been working pretty damn hard and things still didn't work out for them and I think that ambiguity is appropriate in the story because that imbued ambiguity is in life it you'd be a fool to say that everything always works out for everyone if they just do things right I mean I think that's a very that's a very careless thing to say given how much tragedy and catastrophe there is in the world and how much of it seems to be undeserved but that still has very little bearing I think on on your own individual adventure and the necessity for the necessity for opening the door to who you could be and the necessity to do that seriously and I do believe and I think I think that's why this most impossible of verses you know knock and the door will open why that's believable is that I have never met anyone who couldn't hypothesize a better them in some manner all they had to do was ask it's like well how could you be better I think well here's three ways it's like it's no problem right you can think about that no time cloud maybe it's small ways but you can almost always at least think of something stupid that you're doing that you could quit and so that means that you do have this it's a strange thing in people that we have this built-in capacity to pause it a higher self and then to move towards it and maybe maybe that's part of where the religious instinct really came from speaking like really reductionistic ly like as a materialist as an evolutionary psychologist we we have this notion of the transcendent ideal right that it seems to be pervasive across cultures well maybe that's the ultimate manifestation of the human proclivity to be able to pause it an ideal at all and to move forward you pause an ideal okay that you need that to move forward well if you can pause it an ideal why can't you pause it the ultimate ideal well if you can then instantly you've got a religious sensibility instantly and so maybe that's the kind of puzzles like as a biologist what the hell is the basis of the religious instinct because the idea that it's mere superstition like we can just dispense with that that's wrong it's a human Universal you can evoke religious experiences all sorts of ways so we're not going to play that game there's there's some reason that that instinct exists and this the first thing to do with it is to try to reduce it to something that's biological and leave it at that not to mess with the metaphysics but it certainly could be the case that it's the ultimate extension of our capacity to posit an ideal and we also might say well that's good enough because well the ideal moves you forward it fills your life with meaning there's no doubt about that because it is in the movement towards your ideal that life's meaning is to be attained and then the question is well how much meaning is there in moving forward towards an ultimate ideal well more meaning even though it's more difficult how much well that's the open question behold I will stand at the door and knock and if any man hear my voice and open the door I will come in to him and will sup with him and he with me that's a pretty good deal and the angel said unto Him where is Sarah thy wife and Abraham said Behold in the tent and he said I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life and lo Sarah thy wife have a son and Sarah herded in the tent door which was behind him now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age and it had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women therefore Sarah laughed within herself saying after I am waxed old shall I also have this pleasure my lord being old also well she's kind of skeptical about the whole angel man God having a child at a hundred thing and and and and well write and so rightly so and the Lord said unto Abraham why did Sarah laugh saying shall I've Asura T bear a child which I'm old is anything too hard for the Lord at the time appointed I will return unto thee according to the time of life and Sarah shall have a son then Sarah denied saying I laughed not for she was afraid and he said nay but thou didst laugh and the men rose up from thence and looked toward Sodom and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way I'm gonna make a small detour and talk to you about this idea of potential again because it's really I've really thought about it a lot I think music speaks of potential like I think music speaks of potential bursting forward it's something it's something like that and that's why it's so deeply meaningful and and it's this continual pattern revelation of the next wonderful thing that might happen it's something like that so there's that and people find that deeply meaningful and then there's the idea that we all have potential that isn't realized but that we regard that potential even though it's not realized as real which I can't get my head around at all it just doesn't make sense and then although everyone acts that way and everyone believes it because what you act reflects what you believe and you make judgments about yourself and others based on those beliefs and their deep judgments so the idea that you believe that there is such a thing as human potential I think I think it's undeniable if you act at all if you expect things of people at all then you're demonstrating your commitment to the idea of potential but then I wonder if there's something even deeper going on because we are very materialistic modern people and there's great power in that obviously I mean we've obtained great control over the material world for better or for worse but we do have a tendency to think of the world purely as a material structure and isn't really obvious to me that the world is exactly a material structure it seems to be to be something more like constrained potential you know because everything is a certain way but everything that is a certain way could be a multitude of other ways in almost an infinite multitude of other ways and the degree to which something that is could be a multitude of other ways is dependent a large part on how you interact with it right even with materials that we're very familiar with we continue to discover new properties and put them to use it's like things are things are compacted into their material form but that doesn't exhaust what they are especially not in relationship to other things and so it seems to me even if you can't replace the materialist perspective with the perspective that it's better to construe the world construe being as if it's made of possibility rather than the world as if it's made of matter it's at least useful to have that as an additional viewpoint is that because you could say well the material philosophy is very useful as a tool for obtaining certain sorts of benefits which it clearly is but then this more metaphysical perspective which i think is more accurate in some ways that the world is a place of potential is also an extraordinarily useful way to approach the world and and it's practically useful you know what we talked last week a little bit about doing something as simple as trying to organize a room it's it's by no means obvious how much potential there is in a room right there's a very large amount of potential in any given room tremendous amount of potential especially if it's connected with people I think maybe an inexhaustible amount of potential and maybe there's an inexhaustible amount of potential everywhere and we just don't know how to get access to it well that's certainly true and it's certainly true to some degree we don't know how to get access to all the potential of our children for example or ourselves or our loved ones or it or or the people that we know so well so I think the this story is trying to hammer that idea home to which is don't be so sure that it's impossible or maybe don't let the assumption that's it's impossible stop you from going forth into the world that would be and that's a that's a what would you say that's like an inoculation against nihilism and I'm for a long time I understood nihilism very well I could I could understand its rationale associated with the tragedy of life associating with suffering and evil associated with the observation of finitude and the arbitrary and unjust nature of the world but the more I thought about it the less I've come to believe that there's any excuse for it whatsoever and I think the reason for that is that it forced all the effort it four stalls the ability to discover for yourself maybe there's no reason to be so goddamn hopeless except that it's easier to be useless now on a not believe me I'm not making that case I'm not saying that that's what's besetting people who are clinically depressed for example that's that's not my point clinical depression is a terrible thing there's lots of reasons to be rendered to be to be tossed into a catastrophic condition that isn't what I mean I mean that kind of cynical arrogant rational hyper-intelligent nihilism that throws the world away as if it's of little use before it's been properly engaged with better to engage with it and see what happens and better to make the assumption that if the world isn't returning to you what it is that you need then either you're not doing it right or you've conceptualized what you need badly why not at least open yourself up to that possibility right because you could be wrong hopefully if you're suffering this is a great thing to know hopefully if you're suffering you wrong because if you're suffering and you're right then there's nowhere to go so it's very useful to find out whatever errors you might be committing another thing that's really interesting about the Jews in the Old Testament it's a remarkable thing every single time they get flattened by God it's always their fault they never say the world that God created was corrupt and God is evil they never say that no matter what happens right no matter what catastrophe occurs when they have every reason to at least put that hypothesis forward they don't they say we erred we walked off the path it's our fault and that's hard you know because it puts all the weight of human capacity on the human being that's very hard but the outside is it gives you the control it opens up the door that it opens up the possibility that you could be the person that could set it right if you would just let go of what's in your way whatever that is and the men rose up from thence and look towards Saul to man Abraham went with them to bring them on the way and the Lord said shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I'm about to do seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great mighty nation and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him I guess God is talking to himself here or maybe he's talking to the angels but I think he's trying to make a decision for I know him that he will command his children and his household after him and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of them and the Lord said because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great and because their sin is very Grievous I will go down now and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it which has come to me and if not I will know well we don't know what's happened in Sodom and Gomorrah but we know that God's got wind of it and that that's not good and we know that sin means to miss the mark and so we know that whatever has happened in Sodom and Gomorrah means that something about the natural ethical order of things has been seriously violated and there's a strong intimation in the Old Testament which I think by the way is completely correct that if the proper order of being is violated and that's something like the balance between chaos and order say if the proper balance of being is violated then all hell will break loose and one of the things I can tell you from reading a very from reading a very comprehensive set of myths from around the world is that that's a conclusion that human beings have come to everywhere stay on the goddamn path and be careful because if you start to mess around and you deviate especially if you know that you're deviating things are not going to go well for you and that idea is everywhere and I think it's right I think the idea is right because there aren't that many ways of doing things right and there's a lot of ways of doing things wrong and if you do things wrong the consequences of doing them wrong can be truly catastrophic you know one of the things I learned from reading Viktor Frankl first but then Alexander Solzhenitsyn who I think did a deeper job was that and vaclav havel thought the same thing that these people were very much trying to understand what happened in places like Nazi Germany and in the Soviet Union so schnitzel school like our Capello's caligo is a particularly good analysis of what happened in the Soviet Union and his conclusion and it's a 20 100 page conclusion and it's like hammered home with a hammer it's it's a book that everyone should read you know assuming that you can read a 20 100 page screen because that's basically what it is you know first of all what he does is document just how terrible things were in the Soviet Union between 1919 and 1959 and no matter how terrible you think they were unless you know the stories they were a lot more terrible than that and they were terrible personally because everyone lied they were terrible in families because two out of five were government and farmers they were terrible among friends because no one could tell each other the truth they were terrible socially because the whole system was corrupted ban on slave labor and they were terrible philosophically because the doctrine of man upon which the state was founded was hopeless and nihilistic and and they were murderous destructive and genocidal it's like they got it wrong at every single level of analysis simultaneously and the question is why and Solzhenitsyn's answer and to some degree Victor Frankel's answer as well and vaclav havel and I would say also Nelson Mandela and Gandhi they all they all ended up in the same conceptual sphere and the answer was because individual people lived crooked lives because individual people swallowed lies and spoke them and didn't stand up for the truth and the corruption that spread from each individual pulled the entire state mechanism into that corruption and made everything into hell you know there are other theories obedience right that's kind of the Milgram idea from that it's easy to make human beings OBD obedient to people in authority and I've explored that idea quite a bit with regards to what happens happen for example in the Nazi concentration camps yes you can set circumstances up so that people are likely to be obedient to orders that are pathological there's no doubt about that and yes sometimes that's indicative of the weakness of their character but that's not the issue and the idea that what happened in Nazi Germany was because a population of good people listen to a tiny minority of bad people that's a really that's really not a good theory the the the Nazi ethos was there at every single level of the social organization right right from the personal right from the personal right from the familial all the way up to the leadership it was the same thing all the way up and all the way down and the same thing in the Soviet Union and so well so if you miss the which is apparently what the people of sodom and gomorrha did their sin was Grievous than they risk destruction and I just cannot see how after the 20th century anyone with any sense could possibly not see that as true and I think that there's a line in the Old Testament you know that the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom and I can tell you one of the things that frightened me badly was the realization from reading Souls nets and and a variety of other things that I was reading at the same time that Dostoyevsky as well because he makes the same point he said that a human being is not only responsible for everything they do but for everything that everyone else does now you know that's crazy and he was an epileptic and a mystic and that's a crazy thing to say but it's also there's something about it that's true because if you were better the people around you would be less worse than they are and if you were good enough you don't know how much better the people around you would be and so there's this idea too you know that Christ took the sins of the world unto himself that's a complicated idea that I wrestled with that one for a very long time but I think I figured out at least in part what it means it meant that it's something like the realization of complete humanity you see to take the sins of the world unto yourself is to realize that is to understand the Nazi concentration camp guard because that person is human and so are you and so if you can't see you in that then you don't know who you are and if you can see you in that well then you've started to take the sins of the world onto yourself because you've actually started to take responsibility for those terrible things you know I think it's the motif of the the motto of the Holocaust Museum in Washington we must never forget that's close and I think well you can't forgive you can't remember what you don't understand you will forget what you don't understand and the question is what are you supposed to remember about the Holocaust historical event that six million people died that's not what's to remember what's to remember is that's what people can do and you're one of them and if you don't understand that you could do that then you don't know who you are so God's making a case here he's making a case that the people of the Sodom and Gomorrha have sinned and it's making a large racket that even God has heard about that's a very common mythological motif by the way that the sins and and and and what would you call it the sins and noise of humanity can read such a clamor that even the gods hearin and are forced to intervene that comes all the way from the Mesopotamian creation story so anyways it's logical yeah their sinning okay well so what well no not so what it means that God's offended and that everything is at risk that's what it means it's like that's a something worth taking seriously and the men turned their faces from thence and went towards Sodom but Abraham stood yet before the Lord and Abraham drew near and said will thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked this is a very interesting part of the story um friend of mine took me to task the other day when I was writing about portraying the Old Testament God is pretty harsh and judgmental and the New Testament God is sort of all loving which he isn't because there's the whole Book of Revelations thing but um but I got that partly from reading Northrop Frye but going through the Old Testament more detail I realized that that's that is too low resolution interpretation and that God who's dispensing a fair bit of harsh justice in the Old Testament it's also someone who can be negotiated with weirdly enough and that's what happens here you know Abraham has just been told that whatever's going on in Sodom and Gomorrah is seriously not good and that God's going to do something about it and he takes it upon himself this is an act of mercy to to ask God to be a bit more judicious right it's like okay you're gonna wipe out the city well bad things are happening there but you know there's probably a few people in the damn city that aren't completely corrupted by what's going on there of course that's an open question you know because it's an open question for example how many people were there were in Nazi Germany who weren't completely corrupted by what was going on in Nazi Germany and the same thing could be said about Mallis China and the same thing could be said about the Soviet Union it's like well perhaps there was a person somewhere who didn't and at some level what was happening but you know the whole issue of willful blindness certainly springs to mind if nothing else anyways Abraham decides to intercede with God on behalf of these people who are going to be destroyed he says will thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked perhaps there be 50 righteous people within the city will you also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are there that be far from thee to do after this manner he's kind of reminding God that he's a good guy as far as I can tell to slay the righteous with the wicked and that the righteous should be as the wicked thought before from thee should not the judge of the earth do right and the Lord said if I find in Sodom fifty right he seems a bit taken aback here to me if I find him Sodom 50 righteous within the city then I will spare the place for their sakes and Abraham answered and said behold now I have taken upon me to speak upon the Lord unto the Lord which but I am but dust in ashes possibly there shall lack five of the fifty righteous will thou destroy all the city for lack of five and he said he said God said if I find there forty five I will not destroy it and Abraham spoke unto him yet again and said he's kind of sneaking up on God here huh her adventure there shall be forty found there and he said I will not do it for forty sake and he said unto him oh let the Lord not be angry and I will speak possibly there shall be thirty found there and God said I won't do it if I find thirty there and Abraham he seems really to be pushing his luck by this point says behold I have taken upon me to speak under the Lord possibly there shall be twenty found there and God said I won't destroy it for 20s sake and he said oh let the Lord not be angry and I will speak yet but this once perhaps ten shall be found there and he said I will not destroy it for 10s sake and the Lord went his way and as soon as he had left communing with Abraham and Abraham returned unto his place well there's two ways you can read that part of the story one is that three let's say you can bargain with God even if you're kind of annoying about it so that's kind of interesting the second is that even if there's a minority of good in a place that isn't good it won't be slated for destruction that's kind of a good thing and the third is a minority of good in a place can keep it from being destroyed and that's a really good thing too and I believe that as well I think that good is more powerful than evil naivety isn't but I think that good is and I think that in a place that's corrupt a minority of people who stand forth against the corruption can prevail now you know I think I think one of the best examples of that again was all Alexander Solzhenitsyn because he was in the terrible work camps when he wrote his book he memorized most of it which is not an easy thing to do when it's 2,100 pages long and set in very tiny font he memorized most of it and then he wrote it and it was one of the things that brought down the Soviet Union you know was published in the 1970s first of all in wet in the West and the first thing that happened at least initially was that the communism as an ethical system lost absolutely all credibility whatsoever among anyone who was even vaguely educated immediately upon the publication of The Gulag Archipelago he pulled the moral slats out from underneath it and the book was definitely one of the reasons there were many but was definitely one of the reasons why the rotten system crumbled and fell without a war and that's a great example of how one person can take on a tyranny and prevail so and he's not the only person who did that sort of thing because well Gandhi did the same thing I mean I don't think the English were the Russians but you know things were not so good in India and what Gandhi did in India under the influence by the way of Leo Tolstoy was also a remarkable example of a single person intervening in a catastrophe and and and and setting it far more right than it could be so and there came two angels to sought him and evening and lot remember Lauda's Abraham's nephew sat in the gate of Sodom and laud seeing them rose up to meet them and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground and he said Behold my Lords I turn in I pray you into your servants house and tarry all night and wash your feet and ye shall rise up early and go on your ways no he's Abraham's nephew and can spend acting in exactly the manner that Abraham does he shows hospitality to these people and they said no no we'll stay in the street all night and he insisted he pressed upon them greatly and they turned in unto him and entered into his house and he made them a feast and baked unleavened bread and they did eat but before they lay down the men of the city even the men of Sodom compassed the house round both old and young all the people from every quarter and they called him to Lord and said unto him where the man which came into thee this night bring them out to us that we may know them well that's the part of the story that's been used as a diatribe let's say against homosexuality because to know is to engage in sexual intercourse and the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah we're willing to care the strangers out of Lots house and use and abuse them as they see self fit right and so what are they doing well they're violating the principle the principles that govern appropriate conduct with the stranger and maybe the stranger is something you shouldn't mess with because you don't know who you're messing with so that's like warning number one well they're violets are under violating the essential principles of hospitality and then there's the sexual thing here I think is isn't the sexual thing here is something more like the absolute danger of immediate gratification sexual included outside the constraints of any civilized structure whatsoever right because that's his uncivilized behavior as you could possibly hope for right strangers come into your city they're in the house of someone who's part of your city they're being shown hospitality a mob shows up and says four come over man we're going to do whatever the hell we want to them and it's not going to be good and if you get in the way things are going to go even worse for you so so that's what it seems to me to be it's completely dysregulated behavior its behavior that's outside the confines of any civilized structure whatsoever it's an indica it's an indication that the entire the social structure of the entire society has collapsed so that there's nothing left for the inhabitants to do except to engage in the most brutal of immediate gratification and destruction well so what does Lott do I pray thee brethren do not do so wickedly behold now I have two daughters which have not yet known man let me I pray you bring them out unto you and you do to them as is good in your eyes only unto these men do nothing and therefore for therefore came they the under the shadow of my roof well it's hard to know what to make of that you know I mean doesn't exactly seem like the advisable thing for a lot to do and but I think at least what it is is an indication of the degree to which he took the solemn vow of hospitality seriously and I think that's the idea that the story is trying to promote and the angel said stand back oh and the men said stand back and they said again this one fellow came in to sojourn to talk to us and he will need to be a judge now we'll deal worse with him than with them and they press sore upon the man even law and came near to break the door maybe what lot thought was something like well we're done like we're all done but this mob and perhaps I can spare some of us and they press sore upon the man even Lawton came near to break the door but the man this is the angels put forth their hand and pulled a lot into the house to them and shut the door and they smote the men that were out the door of the house with blindness both small and great so that they wearied themselves to find the door so they were so corrupt that they were blind and could not see now even to find the door and the man men said unto lot hast thou here any besides any family members son in law and thy sons and thy daughters and whoever thou hast in the city get them out of the place for we will destroy this place because of the cry of them is waxing great before the face of the Lord and the Lord has sent us to destroy it and lot went out and spake unto his sons in law which married his daughters and said up you get out of this place for the Lord will destroy the city but he seemed as one that marked unto his son and sons-in-law when in the morning arose than the angels hastened blood saying arise take thy way for ninety daughters which are here lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city and while he lingered lingered the man laid hold upon his hands and upon the hand of his wife and upon the hand of his two daughters the Lord being merciful unto them and they brought him forth and seven without the city so he still this is an indication of the danger of not acting with appropriate haste when the time has come I mean law it's already seen what happened he saw that the men came to his door he saw that they were murderous rapists he saw that the angels took them out and he still isn't to leave that place and so I guess one of the things that this story requires people to ask themselves is are you in a place that's so bad that you should leave or when are you in a place that's so bad that you should leave and if you are in a place that's so bad that you should leave then the time to leave is now because there's no time to waste and it came to pass when they had brought them forth abroad that he said escape for their life look not behind you neither stay thou in all the plain escape to the mountain lest thou be consumed and Lord said to them oh not not so my lord behold now they serve and have found grace in my sight and now have magnified thy mercy which thou has showed me into saving my life but I cannot escape to the mountain lest some evil take me and I die behold now there's a city near to flee unto and it's a little one which means maybe it's not big and corrupt like Sodom and Gomorrah oh let me escape thither is it is it not a little one and my soul shall live Matthew Henry said Lord linger he trifled thus many who are under convictions about the spiritual state and the necessity of a change defer that needful work and he said unto him see I've accepted the angel and he said unto him see I have accepted the concerning this thing also that I will not overthrow this city for the which thou has spoken the small City hasty escape thither for I cannot do anything to thou be gone hither therefore the name of the city was or that's where Lord went the Sun was risen upon the earth when Lord entered into Zoar then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven and he overthrew the cities and all the plain and all the inhabitants of the cities and that which grew up on the ground but his wife looked back from behind him and she became a pillar of salt no nostalgia for catastrophe I think that's what that means is that when you leave what's not good you wash the dust off your feet and you don't look back and that's a very harsh lesson this is echoed a bit in the New Testament the idea of the necessity for immediate action these are some of the harsher words that Christ said this is from Matthew 8 Christ is addressing a multitude and asking people to follow him and a disciple comes up to him and says Lord suffer me first to go and bury my father seems like a perfectly reasonable request but jesus said unto him follow me and let the dead bury their dead this is from Matthew 12 well he had talked to the people behold his mother and his brethren stood without desiring to speak with him and one said to him behold thy mother and my brethren stand without desiring to speak with thee but jesus answered the one who was telling him and said who is my mother and who is my brothers for whosoever shall do the will of my father which is in heaven the same as my brother and sister and mother well what does all that mean it means that there's no excuses whatsoever for not getting up and getting at it that's what it means and it means that it even means that when people are beset with a catastrophe like let's say the death of their father that they are prone to use that as an excuse for not going about the business that they should be going about because they can say to themselves well I would accept and accept there's always good reasons I mean believe me there's always good reasons for not doing what you should that's for sure the reasons pile up day after day to not do what you should especially because you're you're aiming at things in the future you can put them off and definitely right because of the demands of the day but these stories they say a variety of things you know in especially in combination they say when you leave somewhere terrible do not look back there's no nostalgia that's that's the letting the dead parts of yourself go and then if you're going to follow the good there's no excuse not to do it and that it means no excuse whatsoever under any circumstances and then it's taken even farther with regards to familiar relationships it is you can't even let them stand in your way and I think that's all true and I think I've seen virtually all of that in my clinical practice like there's no excuse whatsoever for not getting at what it is that you should be doing and I think there's something else that's going on here especially in the New Testament stories which is even made may be worse which is it's absolutely reprehensible to justify you're in action with a catastrophe that extracts mercy from other people right there's a tricky tricky game that's going well of course I can't do that look at the terrible thing that's just happened to me it's yeah okay I understand you're absolved of any necessity to move forward because of your current catastrophe it's like well actually you're not and it's rather rude of you to use it as an excuse and it's certainly counterproductive and Abraham got up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord and he looked towards Sodom and Gomorrah and toward the land of the plain and behold and lo the smoke of the country went up as a smoke of a furnace and it came to pass when God destroyed the cities of the plain that God remembered Abraham and sent lot out of the midst of the overthrow when he overthrew the cities in the which lot dwelt and lot went out of Zoar and dwelt in the mountain and his two daughters with them for he feeler feared to dwell and Zoar and he dwelt in a cave he and his two daughters and the firstborn said unto the younger our Father is all and there's not a man in the earth to come in to us after the manner of all the earth come let us make our father drink wine and we will lie with him that we may preserve the seed of our father and they made their father drink wine that night and the firstborn went in and lay with her father and he perceived not when she lay down nor when she arose and it came to pass on the morrow that the firstborn said unto the younger behold i lay yesternight with my father let us make him drink wine this night also and gold out in and lie with him that we may preserve seed of our father and they made their father drink wine that night also and the younger arose and lay with him perceived not when she lay down nor when she arose thus were both the daughters of log with child by their father well it's like the story you know the story is outlined the catastrophe of sodom and gomorrah essentially the ethical catastrophe of sodom and gomorrah the dissolution of the civilized constraints that should regulate all behavior and then the city is destroyed but there's an echo of it afterwards right because laud had lived in sodom and gomorrah and what happens to him even after his escapes is that he gets tangled into an incestuous web and so I think that that's a it's not foreshadow its post shadowing if there's such a thing it's an echo of what it's an echo and a reminder of how terrible whatever it was that was happening in Sodom and Gomorrah was that even after escaping the iniquity still remained well that's a pretty good place to stop we got through two of three stories so that's not too bad next week I'll talk about the sacrifice of Isaac and see if I can get into the next stories as well and next week is the last lecture except I talked to the theater people and it looks like I'll be able to rent the theater once a month at least for the next four months so I'm going to do that and I'll announce when I'm going to do that and I'll continue doing this probably as long as you'll continue to come and listen I could tell you something cool that happened to if you want so some of you may know that there was a memo leaked at Google how many of you know about that Wow law to you so a colleague of the man who released the memo got ahold of me yesterday and said that the man who wrote the memo wanted to talk to me so I interviewed him today I made a YouTube video out of it we went over his memo which was scientifically accurate in my estimation and so I'm going to release that hopefully tonight so we'll see how that goes he got fired last night eh right he got fired for perpetuating gender stereotypes he told me today that his last performance review he had been given superb which is the top few percentiles of the employee distribution at Google right perpetuating gender stereotypes I went through his document I don't think he said a single thing that wasn't substantiated by a fairly dense scientific literature not to say that the scientific literature is necessarily a hundred percent correct because it never is but certainly to say that he was not merely spouting out misogynistic and ethnically biased opinion quite the contrary so we had a nice discussion about that today and hopefully the discussion will continue so all right questions hello well it's great I mean look a couple of things about that I mean my my daughter has had a catastrophic life in many ways a lot of things went wrong with her physically really bad things and this went perfectly so like thank God for that so then and then the other thing is I love kids you know now infants well you know it's not that I it's not infants are cool and interesting but I'm not sure exactly what to do with them you know but once they're about six months old and then from then on like I love having kids around so I'm thrilled about the fact that this has happened so hooray you know hooray so thanks for that so more as an aside but what you said about not pushing aside the things the day kind of made me think of Nikes motto just do it yeah I thought cool but um my question was that when you were talking about circumcision being a contractual relationship between sacrifice and compared it to a girl having a period that didn't make a lot of sense to me but also it seems to me that it being a sacrifice requires some form of willingness basically from the one have extreme precision they don't necessarily want to put forward what you did you said you specifically didn't want to address as two infants not having any choice in the matter but more in the context of it being a sacrifice how does that I think I think that's how a modern person would see it and I think that there's some I think there's some utility in that but but it's it's it's an incomplete incomplete to some degree you know because one of the things that happens with God neighbor ham is that God tells Abraham that he has to take care of his family his children now the question is exactly how do you take care of your children and the answer is sometimes you make decisions for them now you might say well be better if they could make the decisions for themselves and that's actually the case so you might say well I won't bring my kids to church because it'd be better if they could make the decision for themselves that's what I did with my kids you know but I'm not so sure that was a good idea and the reason I'm not so sure it was a good idea was because there are a bunch of things they didn't learn now the degree to which a parent should exercise control over his or her child is indeterminate but I guess the hope is that you exercise the minimum amount of control necessary to maximize the child's probability of success and that certainly requires adopting responsibility for making decisions as well because the child can't make decisions you know you can't just let the child lay there and make decisions right there's that's just not going to happen and so you might say well Abraham has no right to impose something like circumcision on his children and because it and the and because it's a sacrifice it's something that they should be doing themselves but the problem with that is that Abraham also has no right to abdicate his responsibility to his children in the name of some hypothetical mercifulness and those two things have to be balanced well just according to the story Abraham got the balance right because of course he's made this covenant with God now exactly what that means in people's day-to-day lives well that's a harder issue but I would say I think in the modern world people err on the side of I don't know I think they're more likely to err on the side of taking insufficient responsibility for their children letting them be free in ways that aren't productive that's how it looks to me often because they're afraid of their children so that's about the best I can do without dr. Peterson I was recently I've recently started reading maps of meaning and there was something in the introduction to that story that I found particularly the introduction that you wrote before you went and tell them that I found particularly compelling I guess the part when you're talking about the split that developed in your psyche when you were you know yeah all your yeah I think he talked about it one of the earlier lecture I talked about it a little bit today yeah a little bit today as well yeah you said something in that paragraph there that what you said was you have to earn the right to identify with an idea yeah certain ideas for sure than ideas for sure so basically my question is how should a young person such as myself who doesn't have a whole lot of life experience like be able to like read literature and psychology and interact with you know the wisdom of culture and then incorporate it into a structure that still authentically their own well look I think the way you ask that question means that you're actually doing a pretty good job of that well I well I mean I mean that because that was a very carefully formulated question and it was obvious that you were actually looking for an answer instead of trying to tell the audience a bunch of things that you knew which often happens with questions right and it's alright often it's very annoying for the audience to be subject to questions like that right because it's a form of because it's a form of manipulation it's like well I'll cap this off with the question but actually it's a speech so so I would say you probably already know the answer to that and but then I could elaborate on that a little bit is like there are a lot of books that people have historically regarded as great you might as well start by assuming that they're at least greater than you right and then and to approach them with that frame of mind because even if there's much in them that perhaps is no longer relevant often less than people assume there's much in them that will be of extreme benefit to you and then with regards to making them yours the kind of wisdom that you get from great books is practical wisdom and you act it out and so then what you do is you try to incorporate what you learn into your life into your practices and then if you incorporate it into your life and your practices you build a bridge between you and the great idea right because you figured out how to manifest itself in the conditions of your own life that's something like making the archetypal personal which is which is the right thing to do right it's the proper thing to do because that expands your life upward and outward and in Nobel's you and brings you up as well but so humility is part of it it's like approach these books as if they have something to teach you and then it's humility again in the second places don't take the ideas to yourself until you live them there'll be lots of time for that and besides you know even as a young person it's not like you have nothing to say but the only things that you have to say are your things to say and it's not necessarily that easy to figure out what they are but as I said you did a fine job of that when you asked the question so I think I think as far as I can tell you already know what to do so good do it read everything great you can get your damn hands on hello dr. Peterson so a lot of your work a lot of your lectures recommend the audience tackle life with a lot of attention and intention and you know in my kind of personal gateway drug to philosophy has been more Eastern philosophy and like the bug hood gita and the work of Alan Watts and tower's Calvinism and what I've noticed I may be wrong but this is a common theme in Eastern philosophy which is more passive non action don't make as many plans I wonder how you reconcile that in how you are reconciling that because you mentioned earlier in previous lectures that you've read the TEL teaching how do you reconcile those two different views well I think first that the daodejing in particular isn't about inaction it's about minimal proper action and it's also about minimal proper action after a tremendous amount of sacrifice right so the sage that's speaking forth in the Dao de Jing has already let go of almost everything that he needs to let go of and a tremendous amount of what you're reading in the Eastern philosophies is predicated I think at least in part on the idea of sacrifice there's lots of things that you're grabbing on to like the monkey you know with the jar that's actually causing your misery and so sometimes letting go is the right way of moving ahead but to me that ties into this idea of sacrifice so now whether there's more than that whether there's more intentionality in Western philosophy and less intentionality in Eastern philosophy I'm not exactly sure one way of mediating between those two was was formulated at least in part by Carl Jung he pointed out that the archetypal figure for what the last died at 32 and so to some degree that outgoing extroverted let's say nature of the West is a consequence of its youthfulness in some sense it's useful ethos and that the East Buddha died at a fairly ripe old age and even in the Hindu practices if I remember correctly for many Hindu temples there's a lot of erotic sculptures an idea is something like it can't get past the damn erotic sculptures it's not time to go into the temple but it's more than that it might also be that if you're young it's not time to get past the erotic sculptures so maybe maybe there's a moving forward into life in youth and a letting go in in the latter part of life and that's well that was Jung's way of mediating between those two traditions I think they're tightly aligned with regards to the importance of sacrifice it frequently is the case that it's your desire Maya let's say your desire that's causing your suffering right and so there's an emphasis in Buddhism even more than in Taoism I would say on letting go letting go of what's making you miserable and but do you remember the thing about Buddha is that he got enlightened under the bow tree right he basically stepped into the City of God he stepped into nirvana and he could have stayed there but he chose to come back because he decided that he had a responsibility to rectify suffering in the rest of the world that it was not sufficient for him to be enlightened well everything else was left in a state of insufficiency and suffering and so I wouldn't call that inaction you know it's a I've made the mistake myself it's in action versus non action I actually had to look up that's that good that's well not - really the daodejing does a very good job of distinguishing between those two because non-action is the minimum necessary action to keep the balance between order and chaos proper right at the end in the egg and the Dao de Jing is very very emphatic about this you detach and you watch and when it's time to intervene you intervene minimally without a lot of arrogant self propagandize ation and you tap and if you do that properly you hardly have to do it at all and it's as if you're doing nothing and there's this great wisdom in that book I really like the Dow teaching it's it's a remarkable document and I've seen managers who were like that who are really good at running their company who did nothing Lauren but and what they did well but that but first of all they set up people to replace them because they're Dirk idea was well if I'm a really good manager then this place could run without me there's a real humility in that let me just kind of wandered around the place talking to people and if there was a bit of a problem then they just you know turned the knob the tenth of a degree and the place ran smoothly and it was as if they were doing nothing and what they were doing was detaching so they weren't being buried by their current concerns they were watching to see what was going on and then they were minimally interacting and that worked like a charm so I think that the I don't like the idea that all religious traditions are the same because that just makes them into like a gray mass but I don't see that there's any difference there that can't be bridged I think as you look into the details the bridge has become more clear I'll get you to speak into the microphone especially when you're saying self-deprecating things let everybody hear you okay I much my pleasure what's happened what's happened to you as a consequence yeah yeah well our view seeing it that way anyways well mainly on I've had I've had whatever you say right it's something I thought but not had been able to articulate right so it's been very helpful in that regards and kind of saving a lot of time no yep good good good good my main question is actually on something you said a couple lectures ago it was something along the lines of a family um so I think I'm like god that's the history of your family kind of like the sims or your family something like that yeah be awed you're facing it all the time yeah what's uh how can you stand on that one well there's this idea in the Old Testament that your sins might be visited unto your family seven generations down seems kind of harsh but you know when you're confronting maybe your father's tyrannical yeah but you know maybe his father beat the hell out of him and maybe his father's father was a vicious alcoholic and he just bloody well don't know how far back that goes and and that means also you don't exactly know what you're dealing with right to some degree you're dealing with your father but only partly what you're dealing with is the pathological paternal spirit something like that and it's better to think about that way because it becomes an existential issue at that point you know so you could say that while the father has two components and I mean this psychologically speaking there's the Great Father that's beneficial and protective and that that organizes society and teaches you how to speak and has produced all these wonderful things and then there's the tyrannical oppressive part of the father just like there's the terrible part of mother nature that's destroy than the benevolent part of mother nature that's wonderful and productive and you're stuck with that right you're stuck with having to mediate between those opposing forces just like you're stuck with the adversarial part of yourself and the heroic part of yourself and it's up to you to set those things right otherwise they propagate into the future and it isn't it straightforward thing to say how to set them right there's quite a good movie about that oh now I will Magnolia which I really love it's by Paul Anderson if I remember correctly I hope that's right it's a beautiful movie and it's about this part of it's about this kid whose father's really pushing him to be a superstar at a at a crucial right he's a genius kid and the kid studies this guy named Charles fort you don't understand this movie if you don't know this because you got to know about Charles fort to understand Magnolia Charles fort was this weird old guy who got rich with an inheritance when he was like 20 and spent the rest of his life in libraries looking up impossible things and documenting them impossible things that couldn't happen from a scientific perspective that were well attested to by multiple observers and he produced this news paper called the 14 times which still runs anyways in magnolia magnolia begins with this guy who falls out of a building and then is shot by a woman who misses her husband with a rifle as he falls and I think she's she's charged with murder and the street names have something to do with the deaths and his fall and all of that happened and then in the movie there's a rain of frogs and there are rains of frogs from time to time sometimes they're frozen sometimes they're rains of fish sometimes they're frozen it's like what the hell how does that happen happens quite frequently as it turns out there's a rain of frogs in the in the movie magnolia and this little kid see what happened to him is that he's on stage and he ends up peeing his pants because of the pressure basically and humiliates himself and then there's this rain of frogs which he kind of takes as a sign from God and then he goes to his father even he's like eight years old this kid and he says you have to stop to be and he's dead serious about very careful not being you know what would you call insubordinate nothing like that he decides that that's coming to an end right now and you have to make those decisions in your family because otherwise things propagate down the generations right and every family is rife with pathologies of one form or another and you can learn from that and refuse to push it forward and that's part of I think what you do when you when you when you shoulder your existential burden because everyone is the beneficiary and the victim of the tyrannical father just like everyone is the beneficiary and the victim of mother nature and of themselves and so you lock horns with that and straighten it out one way or another and you don't move it forward to the next generation so and maybe you detach it a bit from your parents too because god only knows what combination of catastrophes culminated in their particular forms of pathology so good enough so this week we've had the Google thing there was the YouTube thing that happened last week what's going on with censorship and what should people do about it if you're in a workplace and pathological things are happening this is easy I can tell you how you know if pathological things are happening at your workplace or they're happening with you one of the two but you can straighten that out if you're being required to do things that make you weak and ashamed then stop don't do them like one of the things I learned from Solzhenitsyn and Frankel was that systems go terribly under out of control when people don't stop them when they're going mildly out of control you know when you might say I should just keep my goddamn head down and shut up it's like maybe you should like that's not bad advice you know you don't want to make unnecessary enemies and you don't need any more trouble than you need but you got to ask yourself on a day-to-day basis what makes you think you're not selling your soul you know and there's so much foolishness going on in the mid-level bureaucratic world now that's where all the tyranny seems to be focused and the reason that it multiplies is because sensible people say nothing when they should say something and what's so strange about that is that there are way more sensible people than people who aren't sensible they're just not as noisy so whether you'll turn out if like you know so let's say something's bugging the hell out of you at work well then you have to prepare to find another job that's the first thing you have to do I don't think that you should find another job but you should prepare to find another job and if possible you should prepare to find a better job because if you can't tell someone to go to hell then you can't negotiate with them and if and if they've got you over a barrel then you can't say anything so you going to you've got to set yourself up so you've got some ability and actually that's a really good principle in your life period you should set yourself up so that you have a lateral move at hand and you should find out well are there things at work that are disturbing my soul you know when you find that out first of all you ask yourself okay I'm disturbed at work okay I'm probably weak and deceitful and useless and lazy you might as well start with that and then you talk to some people like your your wife your friends your coworkers and find out are you stupid deceitful and lazy or is there something not-so-good going on at work and so if you if you can then eliminate your own personal pathology as a cause of your dissatisfaction then maybe there's something rotten in the state of Denmark and maybe you should say something about it before the whole goddamn thing collapses because that can happen it can happen in companies a lot faster than people ever think you know and you may find that well first of all you may find if you say something well first of all that's an adventure that's for sure that's a bloody adventure and you have to do it carefully and you have to be prepared for it it might be the best thing that ever happened to you and the other thing is if you're careful about it you get your words right like in this is a this is strategic battle right it's not something you wander into carelessly then you may find that there's lots of people who feel exactly the same way you do and that you've actually caught and gone to something you're a canary in a coal mine and not just some like psychopathic mouthpiece so you go to ask yourself when you go and do what you do like is this making you stronger is this making you weaker and if it's making you weaker then you got to ask yourself do you really want to be weaker because the weaker you get the more your tyrannize and then worse than that like the weaker you get the more bitter you get and the more you'll work towards terrible things the more you'll snap at your wife the more you'll kick your kids you know like it's no joke to be terrorized at work and so I would say you have an ethical responsibility as a citizen to forthrightly confront creeping tyranny no matter where it occurs and part of part of what we're learning I would say from these stories if we're learning anything at all is that if you're aimed at the good which is a question you really got to ask yourself you know if you're genuinely end up too good then take heart because you're a lot stronger than you think so I have a follow-up question okay so I'm speaking to there's lots of people who are in this situation like you know people at universities and corporations all over the place I you know Google is not the only company that is no unfindable what's the worst repressive freedom of speech denying workplace codes and everybody feels alone right they're all like why should I stand up be a martyr get fired this guy Google got fired yeah what's the point like I'm asking rhetorical no no it's a good question and how do you how do you convince people that there's a point to standing up when it appears to be futile well the first thing I think is you convince them that it's not futile it might be difficult but it's not futile if you get your words right you have something to say there'll be an impact of those words it might not be the impact that you would choose but but the other thing you got to tell people is pick your poison you don't you may be in a situation where you don't have you don't have a cake walk to the garden of paradise you got tyranny or famine those are your choices but you get to pick which one you have and I would say if if you're being oppressed and I mean in your soul by what you're required to swallow at work well you think you're not paying a price for that you have no self-respect and and rightly so but worse than that you're an agent of your own destruction you're destroying your own ideal and you're letting people who are weak and corrupt win and if you stood up and and stood up property but you have to put yourself in order to do this at least to some degree right you can't do it casually you have to do it from some position of preparedness and strength then what makes you think you couldn't scare them back into the corners and that would be a good thing and you know the alternative personally is bad because psychological degeneration that goes along with it I've seen this with many many of the people that I work with who have been terrorized in the workplace to the absolute detriment of their psychological and physical health right to the point of collapse confronting these crazy crazy things when they were sensible people that's a terrible price to pay man like it's it's a bad price and then if the foolishness isn't dealt with at the local level when it's still relatively trivial then it will multiply until it's dealt with at the social level and we're seeing signs of that already antiphon of that you know and problems that aren't solved multiply and soon people fight and you know better to argue than to fight unless you want to fight and some people want to fight and I can understand why but I wouldn't recommend it because that doesn't lead good places it really doesn't lead good places so I'd say you have a duty maybe that's that's where you stand up it's because you have a goddamn duty to stand up and say just say what you have to say if you don't even have to be trying to make a point exactly or trying to get something done it's like this is how it looks to me that's what that guy at Google did he wrote this memo and he said I talked to him today said well he went to a diversity training seminar and he thought no I don't agree with that and so then they asked for feedback so we wrote this document a month ago this was written a month ago got no real response to it but bounced around inside Google until a lot of people you know got interested and then it escaped into the outside world but all he was doing was he was told a bunch of things he didn't think were true he wrote down a bunch of things he thought were probably true he launched that out and said well I think these things are probably true it's like well probably they're true well so he paid a price for it but maybe we'll see what sort of price he paid for it man it's going to be a lot tougher in two years than he was two years ago so no they didn't answer his feedback no no but well you can watch the video the story's there but that's kind of the outline of it so sorry to monopolize this so I have one other question about this and I think it's important aside from Google just being a workplace right it also controls the own YouTube right yes which in order how is the new censorship scheme and it controls a huge amount of the information that people get then so true and so what happens to society when companies such as Google which control our information start to censor not just how about themselves and and maybe the information that's coming out to the rest of the world how much is this already happening and how much how about if we what happened how about if we refused to find out that would be good you know like I reviewed this this guy's document I did that yesterday and everything he said was validated by the scientific literature so what has happened is that someone has been fired publicly by major corporation for stating well-grounded scientific truths right there are exactly the sorts of things that I say in my classes for example and the reason that I say them is because I read the literature it's not because I'm personally happy about the facts I think I cube research particularly is so dismal that you can't possibly read it without being seriously disheartened if I could reconstruct the world so that IQ the IQ research wasn't true well it'd sure be tempting you know but that's not how science works science doesn't tell you what you what you want to hear it just tells you the way it bloody well is and he got pilloried for he got pilloried for revealing a good fraction of current scientific knowledge about gender differences okay that's not good and as you said that's a big company and it controls our communication how about we do what we can to ensure that these large communication companies don't get to impose a factually false ideological structure on the rest of the planet well you can think about supporting this this guy who blew the whistle there's a fundraiser for him online he could use some money he wants to sue Google yeah you know maybe we could maybe we could let them know that hiring a human resources director who's also concerned with equity is probably not a good idea for capitalist company why in the world would you hire your own enemies I don't understand that so well we'll see how the dialogue continues but back to the personal like you need to say what you think because that's where you come from right and if you don't say what you think then you kill your unborn self that's what you do that's what Cain did when he killed Abel and that's why his punishment was unbearable you know you have things in you that are struggling to come to the light that's the truth you need daughter and you need to either that truth because without that truth you cannot live in the world because the world is real and you need truth to live in the world and if you stifle your truth well how how can that be anything but something that brings about hell how could it be any other way so you think well why should you speak up that's easy because the consequences of not speaking up although delayed are far worse that's the reason that's the reason if it can't be courage it could at least be prudence so yeah one more dr. Peterson first of all kudos for mentioning magnolias in my favorite movie that's a great movie man so a few months ago I had a dream and when I told someone this dream they suggested that I read the Book of Revelations oh yeah that's a bad dream that the there's a lot of interesting stuff in that book the thing that really that I found really interesting right off the bat was the the state is represented in two instances as female positively and negatively and I was wondering if you had any thoughts on that in the context of like in maps of meaning you often talk about the state just as as male or as masculine okay first of all I'm going to comment on your t-shirt that's a lobster hierarchy with Horus at the top isn't it it's even better it's the eye of a lobster so that's one that we found yeah that's a good one that's a good one that one really cracked me up when I saw it I really thought that was funny man yeah yeah yeah when my graduate students used to meet when I first talked about this Lobster stuff we meet for breakfast day and they were a very combative snappy group of graduate students and they're always trying to one-up each other with jokes and whenever one really pulled a good joke on another they'd stand up and like it was really it was really funny it was really funny okay let's see can I answer that question you know how if you're looking at a if you look at a room every color that you see is dependent on every other color in the room right your eyes adjust to that so for example if you're in a room based with red light your eyes will in some sense remove the red so you can still see the colors okay so your perception is to some degree on-call is to some degree dependent on Khan context and that's one of the things that makes the symbolic symbolic interpretations tricky because to see how something is represented symbolically you actually have to look at the broader narrative context within which the symbols are embedded so for example you see if I can get this right if the story has an island and an ocean then the ocean is often symbolically feminine and the island is symbolically masculine but if the story's the island and the sky then Island often becomes symbolically masculine and feminine and the sky symbolically masculine and you might think well how can the island be masculine and feminine at the same time and the answer is well it depends on what what it's being contrasted with and why and so that's part of the key to the change in symbolism in the book of Revelation and so it isn't inevitably the case that culture is represented with the patriarchal symbolism but it's most commonly the case so you know there is Mother Russia for example I guess it would depend to some degree to on what your metaphor is for the state because the state can be in all providing mother or it can be a judgmental father and it it seems that we killed more towards the father with regards to terminology relating to the state and I think the reason for that is because I think human hierarchies like chimp hierarchies are fundamentally masculine the fundamental hierarchy is masculine even with chimps there's a female hierarchy but it's like the female hierarchy is nested within the male hierarchy it's not the case with bonobos exactly but I think it is the case with human beings and so I think we have a strong proclivity to masculinize the state but that doesn't mean there aren't exceptions and in symbol symbolic representations are very slippery that way because you can't stamp an entity with a symbol because that would be the same as just giving it a name right and you can't have a dictionary of symbols where you say well you know a house always means the psyche it's like know sometimes the house means the psyche but it depends on the story and so you have to take the the entire structure of the narrative into account to determine why those particular symbolic representations are being used what I offered in maps a meaning was kind of a shorthand you know generally speaking there's nature positive and negative usually feminine generally speaking there's culture positive and negative usually masculine and generally speaking there's the individual good and evil right heroic an adversarial often typically represented as masculine especially in adventure stories but it's a schema and it's an interpretive guide and not a set of hard and fast rules because you're in the domain of metaphor and it's a it's a slippery domain so you have any luck figuring out your dream sorry did you have any luck figuring out your dream at least in some parts I think there's different levels of analysis I mean one was pretty obvious yeah all right all right well thank you very much everyone thank you thank you so I've been thinking about things that I'm happy about and what I'm most happy about so far is that I haven't spilled my my bubbly water into my computer so far while I've been doing these lectures that's always I'll probably do it tonight now that I'm bragging about having avoided it so thank you all for coming this is the last lecture in this 12 part series I did mention that I have made arrangements with the theatre at least to do this once a month for the next four months and we'll see we'll play it by ear past end I want to continue and I'll find another venue and perhaps to do it every two weeks but certainly once a month and maybe I can even get deeper into the material if it's only once a month so that would be then and then we'll really slow down to a snail's crawl yeah so this is a tough one tonight you know it's something a story that everyone with any sense should approach with a substantial degree of trepidation I've been working on my book this week on Chapter 7 which is called do what is meaningful not what's expedient and it's really it's been a very difficult chapter because I'm coming to I'm trying to to extend my understanding of sacrifice which is of course what we're going to talk about tonight in great detail and and I've been wrestling with exactly how to do that and I'm going to read you some of that I think today don't generally read when I do my lectures but this is so complicated that I'm not confident of my ability to just spin it off you know sort of what would you call it spontaneously that's the word and so and it'll also give me a chance to test out whether what I've written which I've been struggling with has the kind of poetic flow that I'd like to have if you're writing it's really good to read things aloud you know because you can tell if you've got the rhythmic cadence right then so so anyways thank you all for coming many of you have I believe attended all 12 lectures and that's really remarkable it's amazing that you know this place has been full every single lecture it's completely unbelievable that would be the case and you know about more than two million views of this is being watched more than two million views it's not 2 million people because it would be the same people I would suspect many times but that's also crazy but it's a crazy world and it seems to keep me getting crazier so hopefully this is some addition to stabilizing it and making it slightly more sane that's the hope anyways so we've got a couple of stories to deal with tonight complex complex stories not really easy to comprehend in any sense of the in sense of the word I mean with the story of Isaac God calls on his his chosen individual Abraham the person who's made this contract with to sacrifice his son and it's how in the world are you supposed to make sensible any sort of sensible sense out of that it's exactly that sort of story that makes modern people who are convinced that the faster we put the biblical stories behind us the better it's it's grist for their mill you know because it seems like such a incomprehensible and even barbaric act on the part of God and so you know I hesitate to even approach it because well because there's so many ways that the an interpretation of that sort can go wrong but we'll see how it goes and so let's walk through it and see what happens so we start with the story of Sarah and Isaac and the Lord visited Sarah as he had said you remember when Abraham was in the midst of his appropriate sacrificial routines which we've characterized as his return to the contract he made with the idea of the good the contract with God he was informed by God that he would get what he most wanted which was an error and it despite his advanced old age and of course Sarah was very skeptical about that as she had every reason to be but this story opens with with the fulfillment of God's promise to Abraham and the Lord visited Sarah as he had said and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken for Sarah conceived and bore Abraham a son in his old age at the set time of which God had spoken to him and Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto Him whom Sarah bear to him Isaac and Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old as God commanded him had commanded him and Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born unto him and Sarah said goth had made God had God have made me to laugh so that all that here will laugh with me and she said who would have said unto Abraham that Sarah should have given children suck for I've borne him a son in his old age and the child grew and was weaned and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac was weaned I suppose one of the one of the purposes let's say perhaps the literary purposes of this story is to exaggerate for dramatic purposes the importance of a child you know when people are young and I think this is particularly true in the modern world they seem to often regard the possibility of having a child as an impediment to their lifestyle you know and of course in some ways I suppose that's true although you have to have quite a lifestyle before a child actually constitutes an impediment because having a child in your life is actually something that's remarkable almost beyond belief you know you can have a relationship with a child that is better than any relationship you've ever had with anyone in your life if you're careful and if you're fortunate fortunate being fortunate helps you know I've seen many people delay having children and for understandable reasons it's no simple decision to have a child and of course now we can make the decision to have a child which of course people couldn't in in past ages really but sometimes you see people delay and they delay too long and then they don't get to have a child and then they're desperate and you know they spend a decade doing fertility treatments or that sort of thing and immersing themselves in one disappointment after another and it's just at that point you see exactly how catastrophic it is it can be how catastrophic it can be for people not to have one of the not to be able to undergo one of the great adventures of life let's say and one of the things this story does by by delaying the arrival of Isaac and delaying the arrival of Isaac continually is to exaggerate the the important significance of the child because it is until you're deprived of something it's truly not until you're deprived of something that you have any sense of what its value is and Isaac was waiting or Abraham was waiting a very long time a hundred years a very long time and the same with Sarah and so they're unbelievably excited and of course this also heightens the drama that's inherent in the entire sacrificial story because it's not only that eventually that Abraham is called upon to sacrifice Isaac which would be bad enough under any other any circumstances whatsoever self-evidently but the fact that he's been waiting a century for the arrival of this child desperately and made all the proper sacrifices and lived in the appropriate manner to allow this to occur dramatically heightens the literary tension now you remember Hagar this is the next part of the story Hagar was is was Sarah's handmaid and when Sarah was unable to bear abraham a child she sent him Hagar and Hagar immediately got pregnant and and gave birth to Ishmael and the story picks up from that point here and if this is quite interesting I mentioned the other week when I was talking to you guys a couple of weeks in a row just how interesting it has been to scour the internet for the for the paintings that are associated with these stories there's just a there's an amazing wealth of great paintings that illustrate every single bit of the of every single biblical story and it's it's it's a it's really been enlightening to me to find out just exactly how poorly educated I am you know like I I'm a what would you say I'm I'm a great admirer of artistic talent and of artistic endeavor but there's so much I don't know about the history of art that it's just absolutely beyond belief and to see this treasure trove of images that I really had no idea that existed of course they're spread all over the world and it's only been in recent years that you could have access to them and in this way just it's just it's a it's a it's a constant revelation of the depth to which these stories have absolutely permeated our culture and the loss that it would be if we didn't know them properly and and take them with a degree of seriousness that they deserve so anyways this is one of those great images and Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian which she had born unto Abraham mocking wherefore she said unto Abraham cast out this bondwoman and her son for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son even with Isaac and the thing was very Grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son was being quite a bit of tension between Abraham or between Sarah and Hagar as you could imagine there might be why wouldn't there be I mean first of all Hagar had the first child and and that elevated her status and she was Sarah's made handmaiden so that's obviously going to be quite awkward and then she she lorded it over Sarah because of the fact that she got pregnant so easily and now we see this situation where Ishmael is doing the same thing with regards to Isaac and that causes a substantial amount of trouble the family is a familial division occurring here God said unto Abraham let it not be Grievous in thy sight because of the lad and because of the bondwoman in all that Sarah hath said unto thee hearken unto her voice for in Isaac shall thy seed be called and but also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation because he is thy seed that's so that's it that's an interesting outcome to you know we we pointed out before we discussed before the fact that because Abraham has made has lived his life properly and has kept the contract with God there's every evidence in the story that no matter what the vicissitudes of Abraham's life you know how the Great Serpent that he sits on in some sense weaves back and forth there's always the promise that things will work out positively and you know you could read that as naive optimism but I think it has a lot more to do with the actual power of keeping the contractual agreement because I really do believe and I've spent a tremendous amount of time thinking about this over the last couple of weeks in addition to the decades before that is that it and all that's happened since I've been doing these biblical lectures is that my conviction in this is being strengthened which is quite interesting is that if you if you do what it is that you're called upon to do which is to lift your eyes up above the mundane daily selfish impulsive issues that might be set you an attempt to enter into a contractual relationship with that which you might hold in the highest regard whatever that might be to aim high and to and to and to make that important above all else in your life that that fortifies you against the vicissitudes of existence like nothing else can and I truly believe that that's the most practical advice that you can possibly that you could possibly receive you know I received I was answering questions last night I did this Q&amp;A; which I do about once a month for for the people who are supporting me on patreon which I also release on YouTube and somebody asked you know they were struggling with their religious faith and they asked what they could do about that and I'd also been thinking about the the difference between Nietzsche and Dostoevsky which I'll discuss in a minute and I was trying to answer this question with regards to religious faith because this person was shaky in his faith in life let's say which is a better way of thinking about it and and it seems to me that the way that you fortify your faith in being and in life and your own existence isn't to try to convince yourself of the existence of a transcendent power that you could believe in the same way that you believe in a set of empirical fact I don't I don't think that's the right approach I think it's a weak approach actually I don't think that the cognitive technology that I don't think that's the right cognitive technology for that set of problems you know that's more technology that you'd use if you're trying to solve a scientific problem it's more like it's more something that needs to be embedded in action rather than in stainable belief and the way that you fortify your faith in life is to assume the best something like that and then to act courageously in relationship to that and and that's that's tantamount to expressing your faith in the highest possible good it's tantamount to expressing your faith in God and it's not a matter of stating well I believe in the existence of a transcendent deity because in some sense who care who cares what you believe I mean you might and all that but but that's not the issue it's not the issue the issue it seems to me is how you act and I was thinking about this intensely when I was thinking about Nietzsche and Dostoyevsky because of course you know that Nietzsche was the philosopher who announced the death of God right and who was a great great critic of Christianity at vicious critic of institutional Christianity in the best sense you know and he announced the death of God and he said that we'd never find enough water to wash away the blood it wasn't a triumphant proclamation even though it's often read that way and don't choose conclusion from that from the death of God the fact that our ethical systems were going to collapse when the foundation was pulled out from underneath them he believed that human beings would have to find their own values to create their own values and there's a problem with that because it doesn't seem that this is something Carl Jung was very thorough in investigating it doesn't really look like people are capable of creating their own values because you're not really capable of molding yourself just any old way you want to be like you have a nature that you have to contend with and so it isn't a matter of creating our own values because we don't have that capacity it might be a matter of rediscovering those values which is what human was attempting to do now and and and so I think Nietzsche was actually profoundly wrong in that in that recommendation I think he was psychologically wrong now you know Dostoevsky wrote in many ways in parallel to Nietzsche was a great influence on Nietzsche their lives parallel each other to a degree that's somewhat miraculous in some sense it's it's quite uncanny Dorothea Eskie was obviously a literary figure whereas nature was a philosopher a literary philosopher but still a philosopher and Dostoyevsky wrestled with exactly the same problems that that Nietzsche wrestled with and but he did it in a different way he didn't literary matter and he has this great book and The Brothers Karamazov and in that book there's a hero of the book is really a lyosha who's a monastic novitiate a very good guy kind of not an intellect not an intellect but a person of great character you know and but he has a brother Ivan who's his older brother who's a great intellect and and a very handsome so a brave man and like Dostoyevsky's villains Ivan isn't exactly a villain but that's close enough Ivan our Dostoevsky makes his villains extraordinarily powerful so if dusty esti is trying to work out an argument he he closed the argument in the in the flesh of one of his characters and if it's an argument he doesn't agree with and he makes that character as strong as he possibly can as strong and as attractive and intelligent as he possibly can and then he lets him just have at her and so Ivan is constantly attacking Elly OSHA and from every direction trying to knock him off his perch of faith let's say and and elosha Alyosha can't address a single one of Ivan's criticisms and and he doesn't have the intellect for it and and and Ivan has a devastating intellect it's devastating to him himself as well what happens in the brothers karamazov essentially is that Alyosha continues to act out his commitment to the good let's say and in that manner he's triumphant it doesn't matter that he loses the arguments because the arguments aren't exactly the point the arguments in some sense are a side issue because the issue is and this is the existential issue the issue is not what you believe as if it's a set of facts but how you conduct yourself in the world and so Dostoyevsky he grasped that and it's one of the things that makes him such a amazing amazing literary figure an amazing genius because he was smart enough to to formulate the arguments in a manner that no one else really could with the possible exception of Nietzsche and that's quite an exception and yet he could still using his dramatic embodiment he could still lay out solutions to the problems that he was describing that are extremely compelling and both crime and punishment which is an amazing thrilling engrossing book and The Brothers Karamazov all of dusty-ass Keys great books really circulate around around those profound moral issues and so I've learned a tremendous amount from reading him so and God said unto Abraham let it not be Grievous in thy sight because of the lad and because of thy bondwoman and all that Sarah hath said unto thee hearken unto her voice for in Isaac for in Isaiah Excel shall thy seed be called and also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation because it as I seed alright so I commented that Abraham is being blessed in multiple directions even when things are going wrong and this is pretty bad because his family in some sense is breaking up the there's this emphasis in the text that because he's kept this contractual relationship with God that that he's in an arc we could say at that we could put it that way and that the that he'll he'll triumph through the vicissitudes of life which is the best you can hope for and it's quite interesting again one of the things that's so powerful about the Abrahamic stories is that it's not like Abraham even though he's chosen by God it's not like he has an easy time of it he has a rough life I mean it's a successful life and all that but it's not it's not it's not it's not without its troubles that's for sure it's got every sort of trouble you could possibly imagine pretty much and and that's one of the things that makes the story so realistic as far as I'm concerned and Abraham rose up early in the morning and took bread and a bottle of water and gave it unto Hagar putting it on her shoulder and the child and sent her away and she departed and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba I found the funny I guess this had more of an emotional impact on me this week than it might have because my daughter just had a baby a week ago and so I've been thinking about this sort of thing know was so happy that that's happened and I was trying to put myself and uh what would you say the conceptual space of the people about who these stories or people who these stories are about and trying to you know notice that the catastrophe that this sort of breakup would actually constitute and you know and the visual images really helped with that because they're they're so carefully crafted and and they hid the story from so many different directions that you know they add that an additional layer of ocean meaning to it which I found very very significant and the water was spent in the bottle and she cast the child under one of the shrubs and she sent to wander in the desert you know so it's not just that she has to leave Abraham's household it's that where she goes is not really amenable to life and so it's it's an extraordinarily dramatic and terrible tale and she went and sat her down over against him a good way off as were a bow shot for she said let me not see the death of the child and she sat over against him and lift up her voice and wept and God heard the voice of the loud and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven and said unto her what aileth thee Hagar fear not for God have heard the voice of the lad where he is rise lift up the loud and hold him in 9 hand for I will make him a great nation and God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water and she went and filled the bog with water and gave the lad drink and God was with the lad and he grew and dwelt in the wilderness and became an archer that's actually a relevant detail to the fact that he became an archer because I think I mentioned to you at one point that the word sin is derived from a Greek word amar kiya even though it sounds nothing like that word and Hammar kiya is actually a an archery term and it means - it means to miss the bullseye and that's a that's a lovely metaphor for sin I think because it's associated so tightly with the idea of of goal direction and and aim you know because there's an emetic Oracle idea that's embedded in that in that image and that is that you know a human being is something that specifies a target which we do all the time with their eyes by the way I mean our eyes our target specifying mechanisms you know we have very precise central focal vision and we use our focal vision to target the aim of our behavior and so we are aiming creatures there's our it's built right into our Plouffe or body or we're built on a hunting platform or aiming creatures and we do that cognitively as well as behaviorally and so as hunters we take aim at things that we take aim at moving targets and we're very good at bringing them down and we've been doing that for who knows how long millions of years really even chimpanzees are carnivorous by the way at least but from them about 6 million years ago so we've been hunting and aiming for a very very long period of time and we still have aims in our life right and that's how we describe them what are you aiming at or what are your aims what are your goals what's your target it's all based on not hunting metaphor and the fact that Ishmael becomes an archer means that he's someone who can take him at the center of the bullseye and hit it precisely and so that's an indication that he's a good man right so and and I suppose also part of the part of it carries part of the narrative weight of the story because of course he's Abraham's son and you'd expect Abraham's son to be someone who's very good at taking aim and he dwelt in the wilderness of paran and he could live there and survive which is no trivial thing and his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt okay so that's the story of Hagar and it's a fairly straightforward story it's complex emotionally but it doesn't and it and it brings up the terrible theme of familial catastrophe and the complications of romantic and familial relationships and all of that but it's really serves as a pro drama to the next story which is the one that's so complex and so difficult to understand and it came to pass after these things that God did tempt Abraham which is a funny thing for God to do I suppose and said unto Him Abraham and he said behold Here I am and God said take now thy son thine only son Isaac who the lovest and at the end of the land of Moriah and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee up and Abraham rose up early in the morning and saddled his ass and took two of his young men with him and Isaac his son and clave the wood for the burnt offering it rose up and went unto the place of which God had told him then on the third day of journeying Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place afar off the neighbor hem said unto his young men abide ye ye here with the ass and I and the lad will go yonder and worship and come again to you it's really one of the first times that we've come across the word worship if I remember correctly and that's a very difficult word to contend with to know is he if you like me or if you're like me when I was a kid because I haven't thought about this for a long time it was never really obvious to me why God would want to be worshipped you know as to go to church and you offer up your praise and thanks to God and you say well really does that make a lot of sense it's like why in the world is that what he wants it's like it's almost like you're you're you're you're kneeling down in front of an ancient Middle Eastern you know tyrannical Emperor and and vowing your submission and that never sat well with me and I suppose it doesn't sit well with many people and I think that's because it's it's not the proper way of conceptualizing it like what happens when you see what Abraham does continually and this seems to be implicit in the use of the word worship in this particular situation is that you know he as we discussed he has an adventure in his life that comes to an end so there's an episode in this life it comes to an end and then there's a period of you might consider it re where he reconstitutes himself to some degree and it's that's when he makes the sacrifices and it seems to me that it's that reconstitution that constitutes the worship the worship is something like you know this is alluding back to my original proposition that it's how you act that's the issue and the worship is the decision to enact the good in whatever form it is that you can conceptualize it as well as trying to continually reconceptualize the good in a manner that makes the good that you're conceptualizing even that much better right because when you start aiming the probability that you're going to be aiming in the right direction is very low but hypothetically as you aim and as you practice and as you learn the target is going to shift in front of your eyes and you're going to be able to follow whatever more clearly and so and that seems to me and especially given the context that this word is used in this particular story is much more appropriate interpretation of what constitutes proper worship and I suppose it's akin to the later Christian idea that it's the imitation of Christ that's the sacred duty of every Christian of every Christian and every human being I suppose insofar as that's an archetypal idea an idea is something like well it's the embodiment of the good that's the issue and it's not your stated belief in the good and you know when nature was criticizing Christianity this is actually one of the things that he brought up as a major issue he said that he believed Christianity had lost its way because it had introduced a confusion between stated belief which is say your belief in the divinity of Christ whatever it means if you state that it isn't obvious what it means that when you state that because it isn't obvious what it would mean that you believe it or even what it is that you're believing in as far as Nietzsche was concerned in some sense not only was that beside the point it was dangerously beside the point because it actually allowed the Christian believer not to adopt the moral burden that was actually appropriate to the faith which was - and this is I'm using a kind of a Union concept here to manifest the archetype within the confines of your own life and that's to make the divine that your relationship with the divine your relationship with the transcendent an infinite into something that's actually realizable in the context of your own life which is to say well you know you're supposed to you're supposed to again to act out the highest good of which you're capable now that will transform your life to some degree into an archetypal adventure there's no way around that because as you attempt to climb a higher mountain let's say or to aim at a higher target or something like that then the things around you will become increasingly dramatic and of import that happens by necessity obviously because if you're aiming at something difficult and profound and you're really working at it then your life is going to become perhaps increasingly difficult and profound but that might be okay you might that might be exactly what you need as an antidote to the implicit limitations that face you as a human being so and I am the lad will go yonder and worship and come again to you now there's an implication here too that it's a foreshadowing that that Abraham offering up his son is actually a form of worship and that's that it's continuous with what he's already done and well now I'm going to read you some of the things that I've written and then all return to this and we'll see how that goes so life is suffering that's clear there's no more basic irrefutable truth it's basically as we've seen what God tells out of and Eve immediately before he kicks them out of paradise quote unto the woman he said I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children and thy desire shall be to thy husband and he shall rule over thee and unto Adam he said because you have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife and hast eaten of the tree which I commanded thee saying thou shalt not eat of it cursed is the ground for thy sake in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee and thou shalt eat the herb of the field by the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground since from it you were taken for dust you are and to dust you will return rough you know and we've associated that with with Adam and Eve's eyes opening and then becoming self conscious and discovering the future and becoming fully aware and falling into history and it seems to me to be a very realistic existential portrayal of the predicament of humankind what in the world should be done about that the simplest most obvious and most direct answer pursue pleasure to follow your impulses live for the moment do expedient lie cheat steal deceive manipulate but don't get caught in an ultimately meaningless universe what possible difference could it make and this is by no means a new idea the fact of life's tragedy in the suffering that is part of it has been used to justify the pursuit of immediate selfish gratification for a very long time now even reading young he often writes as if before the rise of the conflict between religion and science and which culminated saying each his pronouncement about the death of God that people lived ensconce quite safely within a religious conceptualization that have you´d their life with meaning and that that was and that was just the state of reality you know but there's ancient writings that makes it quite clear that the crisis of faith that characterizes a modern people were certainly far from unknown in the past and here's one of those writings this is from wisdom - the Revised Standard Version short and sorrowful is our life and there is no remedy when a man comes to his end and no one has been known to return from Hades because we were born by mere chance and hereafter we shall be as though we had never been because the breath in our nostrils is smoke and reason is just a spark kindled by the beating of our hearts when it is extinguished our body will turn to ashes their spirit will dissolve like empty air our name will be forgotten in time and no one will remember our works our life will pass away like the traces of a cloud and be scattered like mist that is chased by the Rays of the Sun and overcome by its heat for our allotted time is but the passing of a shadow and there is no return from our death because it is sealed up and no one turns back come therefore let us enjoy the good things that exist and make use of the creation to the full as in youth let us take our fill of costly wines and perfumes and let no flower of spring passes by let us crown ourselves with rosebuds before they wither let none of us fail to share in our revelry everywhere let us leave signs of enjoyment because this is our portion and this is our Lord let us oppress the righteous poor man let us not spare the widow nor regard the gray hairs of the agent but letter might be our right for what is weak proves itself to be useless it's an amazing piece of writing you know it starts with an announcement of the rationale for nihilism and ends with the justification for a fascist tyranny you know and it's it's thousands of years old it's it's a remarkable thing to see and to be laid out so concisely the pleasure of expediency may be fleeting but it's pleasure nonetheless and that's something to stack up against the terror and pain of existence every man for himself and the devil take the hindmost as the old proverb has it why not simply take everything you can get whenever the opportunity arises why not determine to live in that manner what's the alternative and why should we bother with it our ancestors worked out very sophisticated answers to such questions but we still don't understand them very well this is because they are in large part still implicit manifest primarily in ritual and myth and as of yet incompletely articulated we act them out represent them in stories but we're not wise enough yet to formulate them explicitly was still chimps in a troop or wolves in a pack we know how to behave we know who's who and why we've learned that through experience our knowledge has been shaped by our interaction with others we've established predictable routines and patterns of behavior but we don't really understand them or know where they origin ated they've evolved over great expanses of time no one was formulating them explicitly at least not in the dimmest reaches of the past even though we've been telling each other how to act forever one day however not so long ago we woke up we were already doing but we started noticing what we were doing we started using our bodies as devices to represent their own actions we started imitating and dramatizing we invented ritual we started acting out our own experiences then we started to tell stories we coated our observations of our own drama in those stories in this manner the information that was first only embedded in our behavior became represented in our stories but we didn't and we still don't understand what it all meant the biblical narrative of paradise in the fall is one such story fabricated by our collective imagination working over the centuries it provides a profound account of the nature of being and points the way to a mode of conceptualization and action well matched to that nature in the Garden of Eden prior to the dawn of self-consciousness so goes the story human beings were sinless our primordial parents Adam and Eve walked with God then tempted by the snake the first couple ate from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil discovered death and vulnerability and turned away from God mankind was exiled from paradise and began its effortful mortal existence the idea of sacrifice enter soon afterwards beginning with the account of Cain and Abel and developing as we've seen through the Abrahamic stories after much contemplation struggling humanity learns that God's favor could be gained and his wrath averted through proper sacrifice and also that bloody murder might be motivated among those unwilling or unable to succeed in this manner when engaging in sacrifice our forefathers began to act out what would be considered a proposition if it were stated in words that something better might be attained in the future by giving up something of value in the present recall if you will that the necessity for work is one of the curses placed by God upon Adam and his descendants in consequence of original sin Adams waking to the fundamental constraints of his being his vulnerability his eventual death that's equivalent to the discovery of the future the future that's where you go to die hopefully not too soon your demise might be staved off through work through the sacrifice of the now to benefit later it is for this reason among others no doubt that the concept of sacrifice is introduced in the biblical chapter immediately following the drama of the fall there's little difference between sacrifice and work they're also both uniquely human sometimes animals act as if they're working but they're really only following the dictates of their natures beavers build dams they do so because their beavers and beavers build dams they don't think yeah but I'd rather be on a beach in Mexico with my girlfriend while they're doing it prosaically such sacrifice work is delay of gratification but that's a very mundane phrase to describe something of soul-shattering significance the discovery that gratification could be delayed was simultaneously the discovery of time and with it causality long ago in the dim mists of time we began to realize that reality was structured as if it could be bargained with we learned that behaving properly now in the present regulating our impulses considering the plight of others could bring rewards in the future in a time and place that did not yet exist we began to inhibit control and organize our immediate impulses so that we could stop interfering with other people and our future selves doing so was indistinguishable from organizing society the discovery of the causal relationship between our efforts today and the quality of tomorrow motivated the social contract the organization that enables today's work to be stored reliably mostly in the form of promises from others understanding is something that's often acted out before it can be articulated just as a child acts out what it means to be mother or father before being able to give a spoken account of what those roles mean the idea the act of making a ritual sacrifice to God was an early and sophisticated enactment of the idea of the usefulness of delay there's a long conceptual journey between merely feasting hungrily and learning to set aside some extra meat smoked by the fire for the end of the day or for someone who isn't present it takes a long time to learn to keep anything later for yourself or to share it with someone else and those are very much the same thing as in the former case you're sharing with your future self it's much easier and far more likely to selfishly it immediately Wolf's down everything in sight there are similar long journeys between every leap and sophistication with regards to delay and its conceptualization short term sharing storing away from the for the future representation of that storage in the form of Records and later in the form of currency and ultimately the saving of money in a bank or other institution some conceptualizations had to serve as intermediaries or the full range of our practices and ideas surrounding sacrifice and work and their representation could have never emerged our ancestors acted out a drama a literary fiction they personified the force that governs fate as a spirit that can be bargained with traded with as if it were another human being and the amazing thing is that it worked this was in part because the future is largely composed of other human beings often precisely those who have watched and evaluated and appraised the tiniest details of your past behavior it's not very far from that to God sitting above on high tracking your every move and writing it down for further reference in a big book here's a productive symbolic idea the future is a judgmental father that's a good start but two additional archetypal foundational questions arose because of the discovery of sacrifice of work both have to do with the ultimate extension of the logic of work which is sacrifice now to gain later first question what must be sacrificed small sacrifices might be sufficient to small to solve small singular problems but it's possible that larger more comprehensive sacrifices might solve an array of large and complex problems all at the same time that's harder but it might be better adapting to the necessary discipline of medical school for example will fatally interfere with the licensee estoppel giving that up as a sacrifice but a physician can to quote George w really put food on his family that's a lot of trouble dispensed with over a very long period of time so sacrifices are necessary to improve the future and larger sacrifices can be better second question introduction we've already established the basic principle sacrifice will improve the future but what's implied by that in the most extreme and final of cases where does that basic principle find its limits we must ask to begin with what would be the largest most effective most pleasing of all possible sacrifices and then how good might the best possible future be if the most effective possible sacrifice could be made the biblical story of Cain and Abel Adam and Eve's sons immediately follows the story of the expulsion from paradise as mentioned previously Cain and Abel are really the first humans since their parents were made directly by God and not born in the standard manner Cain and Abel live in history not in Eden they must work they must make sacrifices to please God and they do so with altar and proper ritual but things get complicated Abel's offerings please God but Cain's do not Abel is rewarded many times over but Cain is not it's not precisely clear why although the text strongly hints that Cain's heart is just not in it maybe the quality of what Cain put forward was low maybe his spirit was begrudging or maybe God was just feeling crabby and all of this is realistic including the texts vagueness of explanation not all sacrifices are of equal quality furthermore it often appears that sacrifices of apparently high quality are sometimes not rewarded with a better future and it's not clear why why isn't God happy what would have to change to make him so these are difficult questions and everyone asks them all the time even if they don't notice asking such questions is indistinguishable from thinking the realization that pleasure could be usefully forestalled dawned with a difficulty that's almost impossible to overstate such a realization runs absolutely contrary to our ancient fundamental animal instincts which demand immediate satisfaction particularly under conditions of deprivation which are both inevitable and commonplace and to complicate the matter such delay only becomes useful when civilization has stabilized itself enough to guarantee the existence of the delayed reward if everything you say will be destroyed or worse stolen there's no point saving it's for this reason that a wolf will down 20 pounds of raw meat in a single meal he isn't thinking man I hate it when I binge I should save some of this for next week there's a developmental progression from animal to human it's wrong no doubt in the details but it's sufficiently correct for our purposes and theme first there's excess food large carcasses mammoths or other massive herbivores might provide that way a lot of mammoths maybe all of the with a large animal there's some left for later after a kill that's accidental at first but eventually the utility of for later starts to be appreciated some provisional notion of sacrifice develops at the same time if I leave some now even if I want it now I won't have to be hungry later that provisional notion then develops to the next level if I leave some for later I won't have to go hungry and neither will those I care for and then to the next level I can't possibly eat all this mammoth but I can't store the rest for too long either maybe I should feed some to other people maybe they'll remember and feed me some of their mammoths when they have some and I have none then I'll get some mammoths now and some mammoths later that's a good deal and maybe those I'm sharing with will come to trust me more generally maybe then we could trade forever in such a manner mammoth becomes future mammoth and future mammoth becomes personal reputation that's the emergence of the social contract to share does not mean to give away something you value and get nothing back that's only instead what every child who refuses to share is afraid that it means to share means properly to initiate the process of trade a child who can't share who can't trade can't have any friends because having friends is a form of trade Benjamin Franklin once suggested that a newcomer to a neighbourhood asked a new neighbor to do him or her a favor citing an old maxim he that has once done you a kindness will be more ready to do you another than he whom you yourself have obliged in Franklin's opinion asking something for someone asking someone for something not too extreme obviously was the most useful and immediate invitation to social interaction such asking allowed the neighbor to show him or herself as a good person at first encounter it also meant the neighbor could now ask the newcomer for a favor in return because of the debt incurred in that manner both parties could overcome their natural hesitancy and mutual fear of the stranger it's better to have something rather than nothing it's better yet to generously share the something you have it's even better than that however to become widely known for generous sharing that's something that lasts that's something that's reliable and at this point in abstraction we can observe how the groundwork for the conceptions of reliable honest and generous have been laid the basis for an articulated morality has been put in place the productive truthful sharer is the prototype for the good citizen and the good man we can see in this manner how from the simple notion that leftovers are a good idea the highest moral principles might emerge it's as if something like this happened as humanity developed first were the endless tens or hundreds of thousands of years prior to the emergence of written history and drama during this time the twin practices of delay and exchange began to emerge slowly and painfully then they became represented in metaphorical abstraction as rituals and tales of sacrifice told in a manner such as this it's as if there's a powerful figure in the sky who sees all and is judging you giving up something you value seems to make them happy and you want to make them happy because all hell breaks loose if you don't so practice sacrificing and sharing until you become expert at it and things will go well for you no one said any of this at least not so plainly and directly but it was implicit in the practice and then in the stories action came first as it had to as the animals we once were could act but could not think implicit unrecognized value came first as the actions that preceded thought bodied value but did not make that value explicit people watched the successful succeed and the unsuccessful fail for thousands and thousands of years we thought it over and we drew a conclusion the successful among us delay gratification the successful among us bargained with the future a great idea began to emerge taking ever more clearly articulated form and ever more clearly articulated stories what's the difference between the successful and the unsuccessful for the successful sacrifice things get better as the successful practice their sacrifices the questions become increasingly precise and simultaneously broader what's the greatest possible sacrifice for the greatest possible good and the answer has become increasingly deeper and profound the god of Western tradition like so many gods requires sacrifice we've already examined why but sometimes he goes even further he demands not only sacrifice but the sacrifice of precisely what is loved best this is most starkly portrayed and most confusingly evident in the story of Abraham and Isaac Abraham beloved of God long wanted the son and God promised him exactly that after many delays and under the imperative possible conditions of old age and a long barren wife but not so long afterward when the miraculously born Isaac is still a child God turns around and in apparently barbaric fashion demands that his faithful servant offer his son as a sacrifice the story ends happily God sends an angel to stay Abraham's obedient hand and accepts a ram and Isaac stead that's a good thing it doesn't really address the issue at hand why was God's going further necessary why does he why his life impose such demands we'll start our analysis with the truism stark self-evident and understated sometimes things do not go well that seems to have much to do with the terrible nature of the world with its plagues and its famines and its tyrannies and its betrayals but here's the rub sometimes when things are not going well it's not the world that it's the cause the cause is instead that which is most valued why because the world is revealed to an in terment degree through the template of your values if the world you are seeing is not the world you want therefore it's time to examine your values it's time to rid yourself of your current presuppositions it's time to let go it might even be time to sacrifice what you love best so that you can become who you might become instead of staying who you are something valuable given up ensures fused future prosperity something valuable sacrifice pleases the Lord what is most valuable and best sacrificed or what is at least emblematic of that a choice cut of meat the best animal in a flock a most valued possession what's above even not something intensely personal and painful to give up that symbolized perhaps in God's insistence on circumcision as part of Abraham sacrificial routine what's beyond that what pertains more closely to the whole person rather than the part what constitutes the ultimate sacrifice for the gain of the ultimate prize it's a close race between child and self the sacrifice of the mother offered her child to the world is exemplified for example by Michelangelo's great sculpture the Pieta Michelangelo crafted Mary contemplating her son crucified in ruins so she's sitting most of you know the sculpture she's sitting and the body of her son is in her arms adults on and it's broken and he's been destroyed and it's a very beautiful but very tragic work of genius work of genius level representation Michelangelo crafted Mary contemplating her son crucified and rude it's her fault it was through her that he entered the world and it's great drama of being is it right to bring a baby into this terrible world every woman asks herself that question some say no they have their reasons Mary answers yes voluntarily knowing full well what's to come as do all mothers if they allow themselves to see it's an act of supreme courage when it's undertaken voluntarily in turn Mary's son Christ offers himself to God and the world to betrayal torture and death to the very point of despair on the cross where he cries out those terrible words my God my God why hast thou forsaken me that is the archetypal story of the man who gives his all for the sake of the better who offers up his life for the advancement of being who allows God's will to become manifest fully within the confines of a single mortal life that is the model for the Honorable man in Christ case however as he sacrifices himself God his father is simultaneously sacrificing his son it's for this reason that the Christian sacrificial drama of son and self is archetypal it's a story at the limit where nothing more extreme nothing greater can be imagined that's the very definition of archetypal that's the core of what constitutes religious pain and suffering define the world of that there can be no doubt sacrifice can hold pain and suffering in abeyance to a greater or lesser degree and greater sacrifices can do that more effectively than lesser of that two there can be no doubt everyone holds this knowledge in their soul thus the person who wishes to alleviate suffering who wishes to defy the flaws in being who wishes to bring about the best of all possible futures who wants to create heaven on earth will make the greatest of sacrifices of self and child of everything that is loved to live a life am dat the good he will forego expediency he will pursue the path of ultimate meaning and he will in that manner bring salvation to the ever desperate world on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place far off it's not an accident also that it's in a mountain right because a mountain is something you have to climb and you have to climb to the pinnacle of a mountain and the mountain is upright and the mountain stretches up to heaven and it's a long journey to specify the right place on the highest pinnacle and and that's symbolic because of course it's a pinnacle that you're always trying to reach just like you're always trying to aim you're always trying to climb upward at least that's the theory depends to some degree of course on your definition of upward and Abraham said to his young men abide here with the ass and I and the lad will go yonder and worship and come to you again and Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering and laid it upon Isaac his son and he took the fire in his hand and a knife and they went both of them together and Isaac spake unto Abraham his father and said My father and he said here am I my son and he said Behold the fire in the wood but where is the lamb for a burnt offering and Abraham said my son God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering so they went both of them together and they came to the place which God had told him of and Abraham built an altar there and laid the wood in order and bound Isaac his son and laid him on the altar upon the wood and Abraham stretched forth his hand and took the knife to slay his son and the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven and said Abraham and he said here am I an angel said lay not thine hand upon the lad neither do thou anything unto him for now I know that thou fearest God seeing thou hast not withheld thy son an only son from me when I was answering the questions last night at this Q&amp;A; this guy asked me this question he said that he had parents who were desperate anti-social alcoholic addicted friendless and that they didn't want him to leave their home he was the only relationship they had but that was of he was the only relationship they had and he asked what he should do and I told him that he should leave and the reason for that is that you have a moral obligation as a parent to encourage your child to go out into the world right and to be whoever they can be to be the best they can possibly be and in doing that you're offering you're encouraging them to pursue the good you're sacrificing them to the good you're not keeping them for yourself selfishly you're telling them that they can go out and live their life and live it properly and and that's the parallel to the idea of the sacrifice of Isaac as far as I can tell you don't want for your son what it is that you want for him you want for your son what would be best for him and for the world and you let go in precise proportion to your desire to have that happen you know the psychoanalyst the great psychoanalyst I say the psychoanalyst I think this is actually Freud's dictum but I'm not certain of that he said the good mother fails which is a bit a brilliant observation because when you have an infant do you do everything for the infant because the infant can do nothing for him or herself but as the infant matures and is increasingly capable of doing things for him or herself then you pull back right you pull back and everytime the child develops the ability to do something you allow them or encourage them to do it and you don't interfere you know so if your child is struggling getting dressed well obviously there's some times that you help them but mostly you let them learn so that they can know how to do it in the future that's better for you and it's certainly better for them there's a rule if you're working with the elderly in an old-age home and the rule is something like don't do anything for any of the for any of the guests let's say that they can do for themselves because you compromise their independence and so as a mother you pull back and you pull back and you let your child hit him or herself against the world and you fail to protect them but by failing to protect them you encourage and ennoble them to the point where you're no longer necessary now they may still want to see you and it would be wonderful if that was the case but the point is is that you're supposed to remove yourself from the equation by encouraging your child to be the best possible person that person can be and you sacrifice your desires all of your desires to that your personal desires even your desires for your child in relationship to you because you want them to move forward into the world as a light right as a light on a hill that's what you want if you have any sense and so you don't get to keep your children at home because you need them now I'm talking generally obviously and there are circumstances under which families make their own idiosyncratic decisions and I'm not trying to dam everyone with a with a casual gesture you know but the point is still strong that the good father is precisely someone who is willing to sacrifice his child to the ultimate good that's dramatized in this story you know and it's brutal but the world is a brutal place and much wisdom comes out of catastrophe and this is an indication of how much catastrophe our ancestors had to plow through had to work through in order to generate the sub structure for the conceptions of freedom even that we have to they for freedom and the good and that's how the story appears to me now I think there's more to it I think if there has to be more to it it lays the groundwork at least in the Christian context for the eventual emergence of Christ as I alluded to in my reading that story obviously has to be unpacked and unpacked and unpacked just like it has been for the last two thousand years it's also an indication here of well I would say the transmutation of sacrifice into an increasingly psychological form which is a development that we've tracked all the way through the Old Testament up to this particular point first acted out then represented in ritual those would be the rituals of sacrifice then laid out in story then turned into a psychological phenomena so that now we're capable of making sacrifices in abstraction right to conceptualize a future that we want to let go of the things that are stopping us from moving forward and to free ourselves from the chains of our original preconceptions and that's laid out in these old stories as the optimal path way of being and there's a philosopher of science named Karl Popper very sensible and down-to-earth person who was talking about thinking and its nature and he was thought about thinking in a Darwinian fashion he said the purpose of thinking is to let your thoughts die instead of you it's a brilliant notion and so the idea is something like you can conjure up a representation of yourself you can conjure up a variety of potential representations of yourself in the future you can lay out how those future representations of yourself are likely to prevail or fail you can call the potential use in the future that will fail and then you can embody the ones that will succeed you do that well simultaneously conjuring up a representation of your current state and determining for yourself because of your undue suffering which elements of your pathetic being need to be given up so that you can move forward into that future and the goal what is it that you're aiming at with that work and not sacrifice that's the ultimate question it's the question I was trying to address in that writing what is it that you're trying to do when you're trying to improve the future we believe that the future can be improved we believe that it can be improved as a consequence of our sacrificial work and so once again what are the limitations what are the limits to that what are the necessary limits to that I would say we don't know I would say as well that that's actually something that the entire corpus of biblical stories is trying desperately to articulate to figure out and articulate right we we conjured up this remarkable idea the future exists we can see it even though it's only potential we can adjust our behavior in the present in order to maximize our probability of success in the future how best to do that well the idea is something like don't hesitate to offer the ultimate sacrifice if you want the future to turn out ultimately well now obviously that idea is closed in metaphysical speculation and religious imagery but it still remains an intensely practical issue right what is it that you could contract for let's say if you were willing to give up everything about you that's weak and unworthy the there's a there's a continual hints of that in the Old Testament right because what happens with Noah of course is that he establishes the proper covenant with God the proper contract with being let's say and thrives as a consequence and the neighborhood does the same thing there's a strong intimation that that's how the world is set right now that idea develops and magnifies as the stories progress into something like into something like the concept of heaven on earth the notion being that the proper sacrificial attitude produces a psychological state and then the social state that's a manifestation of that attitude that decreases the probability that the world will Carine into hell and increases the probability that people will live high-quality meaningful private lives in a society that's balanced and capable of supporting that and none of that seems to me to be questionable really I also don't think it's anything that people don't actually know you know people have told me many times that when they listen to me talk they are hearing things that they already know knew but didn't know how to say it's something like that and this is one of those things that I think is exactly like that I mean I think it's at the very core of our moral knowledge and which is our behavioral knowledge and our perceptual knowledge I mean let's get this straight moral knowledge is no trivial matter it's knowledge about how it is that you orient yourself in the world there's no more profoundly necessary form of knowledge oh it's predicated on on something that's exactly like this we know that we have to make sacrifices we know that we have to omit what's good so then why isn't that we don't aim at what's best and make the sacrifices that are necessary in order to bring that into play I think it seems to me that in some sense that's self-evident the question is why we don't do it but there's answers to that too already in material that we've covered life is hard and it hurts people it's ripe with limitation and some of its arbitrary and it's no wonder and some of its unjust and some of it's worse some of its malevolent which is even worse than something I haven't talked about at all in this lecture it's not surprising that that combination of vicissitude can turn people against being but I think even when that happens and even when people have the kind of history that if they revealed to you you would say well it's no wonder you turned out that way the people who turn out that way still know that it's wrong they still know that however deep their own suffering however arbitrary their own suffering however much that's caused by the malevolence of others as well as the tragedy of existence that that does not in any way justify their turning away from the good and I believe everyone knows that I believe that they know it implicitly even if they don't allow themselves to know it explicitly and I believe that if they violate that idea then they violate themselves and that they end up in Kane's position which is the position of the man who's been given a punishment that is too great to bear an angel said lay not thine hand upon the loud now to do without anything unto him for now I know that thou fearest God seeing thou hast not withheld thy son thine only son from me and Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his thorns by his horns and Abraham went and took the RAM and offered him up for a burnt offering instead of his son and Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah Jireh as it is said to this day in the mount of the Lord it shall be seen and the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time and said by myself have I sworn saith the Lord for because thou has done this thing and has not withheld thy son thine only son that in blessing I will bless thee and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven and as the sand which is upon the sea shore and thy seed shall possess the gates of his gate of his enemies and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed because thou hast obeyed my voice so Abraham returned unto his young men and they rose up and went together to Beersheba and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba and it came to pass after these things that it was told Abraham saying he hold Milka she has also borne children unto thy brother Nahor and Sarah was a hundred and seven and twenty years old those were the years of the life of Sarah and Sarah died in quor'toth Arba the same as Hebron in the land of Canaan and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah and a weeper well I don't exactly know what to do now because that I'll review what we've what we've covered and then I'll bring this to a close we can have some more questions than would be usual tonight so what have we established by this point the stories that have been revealed so far are something like they contain the idea that there's something divine that's analogous to the human capacity for communication and attention that's at the it operates at the genesis of being itself that's the initial account in the Old Testament it's an account that places the role of Spirit centrally in the in the nature of being now I'm not exactly sure what to make of that because in some ways I'm is materialistically oriented as modern people typically are but the stories make sense to me in many ways the idea that there's something world creating about human consciousness and that that's akin in some sense to the divine force that called order out of chaos at the beginning of time seems to me to be a very powerful metaphysical idea and it also seems to me to be an idea that is immovable at the foundation of Western culture because our entire legal system our society our expect mutual expectations all of that are conditioned to the final degree by our presupposition that each of us has an intrinsic value that transcends the local conditions of our being and it's with that presupposition that we've been able to establish the society that functions a society that functions and functions well and it has its current characterization and that's a nun it's an unlikely occurrence and it's a non-trivial reality and I don't see any way out of that way out of that conclusion I don't see anything that that can easily be replaced with and so god calls being into order into being out of chaos at the beginning of time and the tributes to human beings the same essential capacity then we turn to Adam and Eve in the garden and they're unconscious by all appearances allied tightly with God but unconscious they don't seem aware of the future they don't seem aware of themselves they don't seem aware of their own vulnerability they make the fatal error of having their eyes open they discover their own vulnerability they also discover their capacity for evil we reviewed that to some degree what's the association because it's the tree of the knowledge of good and evil the fruit of which they eat what's the association between the discovery of vulnerability and the emergence of moral knowledge it's something like as far as I can tell that you actually don't know how to be evil or to be good until you're actually aware consciously of your own vulnerability because the essence of evil is the exploitation of vulnerability perhaps for the sake of that exploitation and I can't understand how to hurt someone until I know exactly how I can be hurt myself and I can't understand how I can be hurt myself until I become cognizant of my mortal limitations until I understand what brings me pain until I understand the suffering that goes along with my mortal limitations my my inevitable death and the suffering that goes along with that and with the with the accrual of the knowledge of mortality and good and evil Adam and Eve are cast out of paradise and history begins and that seems right to me because I don't think that history did begin before human beings became self conscious so there's something about that that's right if his three doesn't really begin until people become aware of the future history doesn't really begin until until people work and start to build right we still live we would still be ensconced in essentially an animal existence until we're aware of the future and start to buttress herself against it start to wear clothing start to build buildings start to make cities all in all in consequence of having become aware of the fact that we're fragile and that the future is a dangerous place so that seems to me to be existentially correct and then we have the story of Cain and Abel brilliantly placed immediately afterwards and so those are the two first two people in history essentially and they make sacrifices so that goes along with the idea of the discovery worked and necessity of work and the discovery of the future and then exactly what you'd expect would happen one segment of mankind let's say makes the sacrifices properly and prevails in the other segment makes the sacrifices improperly and fails and that's perfectly reasonable given what you see around you because that's what seems to happen all the time and then more interestingly I would say that the sacrificial failure produces embitterment right and that embedment produces a hatred for being and a desire for revenge that seems perfectly appropriate when I look at people who are bitter and who want revenge it's generally because their sacrificial efforts have failed now I'm loathe to say that that's a matter of their own doing although sometimes it clearly is the embittered and vengeful complained to God and blame him for the structure of existence you know I read about the Columbine massacre and the kids who undertook it that'll make your hair stand on end if you want to read something that will really disturb you reading Erich Harris's writings will really disturb you no matter how much you know about human beings reading Erich Harris's writings will disturb you and Harris's Kane you know he says it straightforwardly he hates human beings hates being itself he would destroy everything if it was within his power to do that and of course him and his colleague were motivated to produce far more carnage than they managed that day what was successful was only a fraction of what they had planned and and Harris said very straightforwardly that he was that he had set himself up as the judge of being and that it lacked all utility in his eyes human beings certainly should all be did all be removed from the face of existence because of their pathology and the fundamental horrors of being itself so there's nothing in the Cain and Abel story that isn't real it's real and Kane complains to God as people will when their dreams are dashed and then it's goes for people who don't believe in God - it doesn't really matter you know it's harder I suppose if you're atheistic to figure out who to blame but that doesn't mean that the sentiment well it doesn't mean that the sentiment is any different right the same drama is being enacted you shake your fist at the structure of being rather than at God himself but it doesn't make any difference except in the details so God responds to Cain and tells him that he's got no right to judge being before he gets his sacrificial house in order and even worse he says that Cain is the architect of his own downfall and the invited catastrophe in his own house into his own house willingly and entered into a creative union with it and therefore brought about his own demise and it's that additional self-knowledge and you can imagine to you know imagine that you're in you're facing your life you're facing the failures of your life and let's say that you've had a failed life and you're bitter about that and then you meditate upon it and you think why has this come about and then you think well perhaps I did something wrong you know when Alexander Solzhenitsyn wrote The Gulag Archipelago which is the book that detailed the catastrophes of the Soviet you and help bring it down it is one part of that book that just struck me so so viciously when I read it he he was in the car in the GU leg and he was there for a very long time and he said that he observed a variety of people in the camps who he really admired they were rare they were usually religious believers in his in his experience who were not participating in the pathology of the camp's at all period no matter what he said he learned a lot from watching those people he had a hard time believing that they even existed that they could even exist but he said that one of the things that he was brought to as a consequence of watching those people live their contract with goodness out even under the most horrifying of conditions was that it was possible that he himself was responsible for his position in the camp now it's a very dangerous line of argumentation you know because who wants to be the one who blames the victim for the catastrophe you know you have to be very careful when you walk down that road but Solzhenitsyn was speaking about himself and he said well he was a communist you know and he arrogantly and forthrightly moved the movement out into the world and had not fully gone over his life with a fine-tooth comb to find out what mistakes he had made that brought him so low but his contention eventually was that part of the reason that he ended up where he ended up was because he and many others had completely forfeited their relationship with the truth and allowed their society to degenerate into deceit and tyrannical catastrophe without mounting sufficient opposition and so he decided when he was in the camps to straighten himself out bit by bit and that culminated in the production of the Gulag Archipelago in that book really demolished once and for all any moral credibility that the communist totalitarian systems had left and so one man in the depths of catastrophe who and through good example at least in part to stop lying produced a book eventually the demolished the foundation of the very system that had imprisoned him and that is really worth thinking about that's one example of the absolute grandeur of the human soul and the capacity for transformation that it has when let loose properly on the world so let's say you're conceptualizing your own failure you know and you meditated on it and you come to the conclusion that God forced Cain to pay not only have things not been going very well for you but it's actually your fault and not only that you brought it on yourself and not only that you knew it all the time well then you might think you'll wake up and fly right right you'll get your wings in order and fly right but there's no reason to assume that at all and that's not what happens to Cain that just makes him more bitter right and you can understand that if you think about it just for a second it's like bad enough when something horrible happens to you but then to have to swallow the additional pill right have to take in the information that you could have done something different it was avoidable and you knew it at the time and you decided to do it anyways and I think people are in that situation a lot more often than ever anyone is willing to admit you know you have that little voice in the back of your head that says don't do it and you override it and you know it's arrogance that makes you override it it's always arrogance you know it always warns you to always arrogance yeah I can get away with it it's like no you can't I don't think you ever get away with anything so and maybe your experience has taught you different but my suspicions are it hasn't and if you think it has well the other shoe hasn't yet dropped so Cain doesn't take the opportunity to let God's wisdom reorient his character and that that could have been outcome he could have got down on his knees so to speak and said oh my oh my god I've been wrong all along I've been living improperly I've been making the wrong sacrifices Abel deserves everything he has I got exactly what was coming to me you know could I possibly now Street myself out and and and and and live in repentance and improve my position but that's not what he did at all he said all right fair enough I get it it's like I'm going to go after the thing I most admire and I'm going to destroy it and I'm going to do that despite its cost to me and I'm going to do that just to spite the creator of being that's exactly what Paris did at Columbine it's exactly what he says in fact it is uncanny writings it's why the mass murderers always shoot themselves afterwards not before because you might wonder if you're so upset with the structure of being why you don't just commit suicide in your basement why do you have to go out and mass murder before you top it off with a gun to your forehead well you don't make the point as effectively if you just commit suicide in your basement it's like well I'm I life means nothing to me but neither does anyone else's and neither does the structure of being itself and I'll take all my revenge as much as I possibly can and then just to show you how little I care I'll cap myself off at the end and I would say also people say all the time I don't understand how that could happen it's like I don't believe that I think an hour of thought of real thought real thought about your darkest feelings about existence itself illuminates the pathway to that sort of behavior quite clearly I think if you I mean I might be wrong I might be a darker person than most and it's certainly okay okay well at least I think there are plenty of people out there who are sufficiently dark to know exactly what I mean what I'm saying these things and I would also say that if it doesn't leap to your understanding how that pathway might be illuminated then you need to know a lot more about yourself than you actually know now because whatever you might say about someone like Eric Harris he was a human being too you know there's this idea in the New Testament that Christ was he who took the sins of the world unto himself it's a very complicated idea but part of it part of it part of it is associated with the idea that he met the devil in the desert as well to take the sins of mankind onto yourself as to understand that within you dwells exactly the same spirit that commit the atrocities that Columbine or that ran the camps at Auschwitz and to actually understand that that's part and parcel of your makeup and then to take responsibility for it and I think that in the aftermath of the terrible 20th century that's what we're left with we are left with the necessity to take responsibility for the most terrible aspects of ourselves and that way perhaps we can stop those terrible things from happening again that also means you know that you don't look for the you don't look for the what would you call it the purveyor of malevolence outside yourself right it isn't someone else even though sometimes it's someone else you know you know what I mean it's like there are identifiable perpetrators but that's not precisely the point the point is something more like that the proper place for the encapsulation of that malevolence at least the proper place to start is within the confines of your own existence and then perhaps within the confines of your family and that way you're not a danger to those that you miss apprehend as malevolent and evil because you won't get your aim right to begin with you'll identify them improperly and you'll take your revenge in a manner that allows you to omit your own responsibility to act out your unconscious desire for revenge and to move the world just that much closer to help also Cain kills Abel and then Cain gives rise to his descendants one of whom is the person who's the first artificer in weapons of war and then comes the flood right which seems perfectly miraculously reasonable to me because what those stories do it's so amazing that the story of Cain and Abel segues into the story of the flood because it is the case that the catastrophes that beset society can best be conceptualized as the spread of individual pathology into the social world and the envy what would you call these the magnification of that pathology to the point where everything comes apart and I truly believe that if you familiarize yourself with the last hundred years of history that that's the conclusion that you would derive and the people who are most wise that I've read who commented on that say the same thing over and over which is the key to the prevention of the horrors of Auschwitz and the gulag in the future is the reconstruction of the individual soul at level of each individual and that's a terrible message because it puts the burden on you but it's an amazing message because it also means that you could be the source of the process that stops that catastrophe and malevolence from ever emerging again and you know it's hard for me to imagine that you have anything that could possibly be better to do with the time that you have left well then we see Noah who walks with God and who's generations are in order right which means that he's entered this contract with the good let's say that has the protective function of the ark he's put his family together and he can ride out the worst catastrophe and he's actually our ancestor right so interesting it's that these people who get their act together properly and make a contract with the good are constantly presented as the genuine ancestors of mankind and that's a really positive element of the story as well and it's one I believe because well it hasn't been easy for us to get here you know we are the descendants of the great heroes of the past and if you took all those heroes and you and you and you and you told their stories and you distilled their stories into a single story maybe you'd have a story like the story of Noah or the story of Abraham you know the story of the successful the story of our forefathers you know I'm not the cancer on the planet that certain people tend to think that we are and so the goal is to be one of the people like that and there isn't anything better that can possibly be done and the alternative is something like hell and so Noah rides out the storm and that's what everyone wants because you want to ride out the storm you don't want to be happy because that'll just happen if it does or if it doesn't but you definitely want to constitute yourself so that you can ride out the storm because the storm is always coming and so then you're fortified against the worst and that's what you want because well the best you can handle the worst you have to prepare yourself for and then we see the same thing repeated in the story of Abraham essentially right Abraham makes this contract with the good and constantly renews it that's cough ice and his worship he constantly renews it and he has the adventures that are sufficiently typical of the adventures of a human being who's alive and engaging in the world right he he bumps himself up against all the horrors of existence and yet the story is told in such a manner that reveals that his primary ethical commitment to the overarching good is sufficient to protect him against the vicissitudes of existence well that's an optimistic story and as a pessimistic person I appreciate an optimistic story that's believable and the great demands placed on Abraham it's not as if this just comes to him as a gift he has to be willing to sacrifice whatever is necessary in order to maintain that contract and so that seems to me to be realistic there's no reason to assume that life isn't so difficult that it actually demands the best from you that it's actually structured in that manner and that if the you are willing to reveal the best in you in response to the vicissitudes of life that you might actually prevail and you might actually set things straight around you and law and what if that was true that would be a remarkable thing and I can't see how it cannot be true and I can't see that it's not stamped on the soul of everyone who's conscious I think we all know this perfectly well although the stories remind us you know Plato Socrates believed that all knowledge was remembering you know he believed that the soul before birth had all knowledge and lost it at birth and then experience reminded the soul of what it already knew and there's something about that that's really true because you're not just a creature that emerged 30 years ago or 40 years ago you're you're the inheritor of three and a half billion years worth of biological engineering right you have your nature stamped deeply inside of you far more deeply than we any of us realize and when you come across these great stories these reminders they're a reminder of how to be properly and they echo in your soul because the structure is already there the external stories are manifestations of the internal reality and then they're a call to that unter internal reality to reveal itself well then we come to the end of the Abrahamic stories least this section of them with Sarah's death and Abraham is called upon to make the supreme sacrifice and interestingly not because he's willing to make the supreme sacrifice he actually doesn't have to and that's an interesting thing as well because I believe that it's reasonable from a psychological perspective to point out that the more willing you are for example to face death perhaps the less likely it is that you're going to have to face it at least in an ignoble manner and so with that then we'll bring this 12 part series to a close you know I think that applause is for everyone and I hate to say that because it sounds so new agey ha ha ha but you know it really does it really does seem to me that this is a participatory exercise you know and that and that it would not be possible for me to go through these stories without having you here to listen and so and I always think when talking to a crowd that it's a dialogue you know it's a dialogue you said and you listen and you've all listened and and and thank God for that you know and that gives me a chance to think and it gives me a chance to watch and it gives me a chance to interact because you know you're emblematic of of humanity at large I suppose that's one way of thinking about it and for me to be able to craft what I'm saying so that it has an impact on all of you here also means that I can simultaneously craft it so that it has an impact that in principle can reach far beyond this place and so you know I'm hoping that I'm really hoping that one of the things that can start to happen with this at least is that we can put our culture back on its firm foundation because it's something that's desperately needed and in order to do that we have to understand both the evil and the nobility of the human soul and that's likethat's that's a fundamental truth you know and I don't think you can get to the nobility without a soldier and through the evil I really don't believe that at all it's no place for the naive to go that's for sure but anyways I would like to thank you as you thanked me for your close and careful attention and your support during all of this it's been a really a remarkable experience it's certainly sort of developed beyond my my dreams so on to the questions hi dr. Peterson it appears to me from this series and from the biblical stories themselves that the emphasis of the stories is the utmost importance of the fool for the maintenance and adaptation of being or society the figure will lunge headfirst in the uncharted territory explicitly aware of the danger and risk of loss and confronting what cannot be understood but unafraid and with the zeal and that the dangers of ideological possession just as much are just as much of a concern as that individuals are unwilling and perhaps unable to form an opinion and take a stance one way or another when confronted with a fork in the road or a decision that must be made you've seen this apathy apathy throughout the universities as I have too in the public schooling system my question is how can one model being the fool to plunge into the unknown and publicly fall on your face in pursuit of learning in a way that clearly demonstrates the urgency and utility of the fool well there isn't any difference between the pool and someone whose courageous right from an archetypal perspective and I mean Abraham is a fool obviously when he starts his his adventures I mean the story lays it out in that manner he's far too old to be leaving home for example he's a late bloomer you know and and then he has he has a lot of catastrophic adventures along the way and certainly you could imagine that had you encountered him when he first encountered the famine in the land of strangers when he first went out that the idea that he had he had followed his misguided intuitions would have been self-evident but in the Abrahamic stories there is this call to get out and do and that's it and the thing is is that you know one of the things I've learned to put it to make it concretely is that like I've done a lot of different things in my life and every time I did a new thing I was a fool I did it badly I was an imposter right and and and because I when you first start to do something you don't know what you're doing but that that's okay that's an acceptance of your vulnerability right and your ignorance that's humility in some sense the willingness to be a fool in a nude in the land of strangers that's it the willingness to be a fool in the land of strangers and that's an act of courage because you also reveal your vulnerability to the world by stumbling around but as long as you're stumbling forward then you're going to move forward now how do you do that more concretely are you aim at an ideal right and you aim at an ideal that's beyond you now maybe you don't aim to begin with it an idea that ideal that's so beyond you that you're crushed by its magnificence you know maybe that's that's that's too demotivating to move you but you could at least conceptualize yourself as the you that you are with fewer of the faults that you know of and that's a good start and I also think that's associated with the idea of humility take stock figure out how it is that you're not who you could be and then move in that direction and accept the consequences you know you're you're going to get slapped a lot but maybe with each slap you'll straighten up a little bit especially if you listen even to the people who are slapping you because sometimes they're the ones who can reveal for you very quickly where it is that you're weak and insufficient so that you won't have to be that way in the future so yeah hello dr. Peterson I have no questions for you all I ever wanted to do is just stand in front of you and be able to thank you for everything you've done fine my pleasure oh good morning citizen Peterson you got a short one yeah I do I mean a question eight is the best question relax trust me this one's good but first I'll break the ice now I'm going keyboard up said so state now no icebreaker you want me to get right into the real question I want you to get right into the question all right so this question is about hyper critical thinking yep now everyone knows the critical thinking is a great thing to develop you have to be able to cook I guess think about your ideas so if information is presented do you have to decide if it's legitimate or if there's some sort of deceit behind it but when it's taken to its extreme no matter how great or noble somebody is you can always find a crack in the armor and try to figure out how they're covering up something that's not great about them you know and you might then discredit everything they do is just a facade okay so let me stop you there for a sec because I want to address two of the issues that you already brought up so there's there's the issue of hyper critical thinking partly in relationship to yourself and partly in relationship to others so I'd like to address the issue with regards to yourself to begin with so there's this idea that Carl Jung developed um he extracted it I don't know from where from some ancient writings that he was familiar with I believe they were Jewish writings he said that classically speaking traditionally speaking God was viewed to rule being with two hands the right hand and left hand and the right hand was justice and that was you're going to get what's coming to you but the left hand was mercy and the idea essentially was that the cause could not exist without the proper combination of justice and mercy you should get what's coming to you but people are fallible and they make mistakes and so it's reasonable to apply that to yourself you know there's an idea that's being developed by psychologists over the last few decades that people are basically narcissistic and that they generally feel that they're better at most things than other people I don't buy that I don't think the experimental evidence for that is very strong and I certainly haven't seen that for example in my clinical practice where I've seen that people are generally far harder on themselves than they are on other people one example of that I've written about this in my new book too is that you know if you have a pet that's sick and you take it to the vet and you get medication you're very likely to give the pet the entire course of medication to go to the pharmacy to get the prescription filled to give the pet the medication to follow it through but if you are the person who has the problem yeah you all laughed if you know the story it's like a 30 you won't even go fill the prescription and of the remaining 2/3 of you half of them won't take it to completion and you think well why are people like that and I think it's because they know themselves they have contempt for themselves because of their flaws and then they come to despise themselves and I think that's a big mistake that's Locke that's too much justice and not enough mercy and you know Jung wrote about the biblical injunction that you should treat your neighbor as if he were yourself essentially but he talked about that as an equation which was quite interesting so because it's often read as something like you should be nice to people which is not what it means at all because first nice is a very low-end virtue but it isn't what it means what it means is that you should you should treat your neighbor as if he or she is someone that you wish to encourage and develop but that you should also have exactly the same attitude towards yourself which is weak sort of in some sense regardless of what your opinion is of yourself critical let's say hyper critical even is often the case with people who are anxious or perhaps who are hyper conscientious you have to put forward to yourself the same sympathy we could say that you would extend to someone else that you cared for that's the thing is that you have to come to treat yourself as if you're someone that you care for and I mean that technically you know you detach yourself from yourself and you think okay well if I was going to construct a mode of being that was optimal for this person that I happen to be what would that look like and that's sort of independent of whether or not you think you deserve it it's like maybe you deserve it maybe you don't innocent until proven guilty that's a pretty good policy but you should come to lay out a mode of being for yourself that gives you some credit you know when that will also help you in your dealings with other people but it's often very difficult for people to do that to themselves okay so that's the that's the first part of that perfect so it starts out with this hyper critical thinking and you talked a lot about Nietzsche's assertion about the death of God but I see it sort of more like a willful destruction of the heroic ideal and I guess several months ago I had occasion to look up a definition or explanation for the zeitgeist of modern victimhood outraged culture and I saw it in this particular case and I found and this paragraph okay this has what you called the rhythmic cadence that just made my hair stand up on sense and if you could look at it and read that this is better than the Lawson the image of man that dominates in modern literature in visual art cinema and theater is primarily a group gloomy image the Great and the noble are suspect from the outset they must be torn from their pedestal so that one can see through them morality counts as hypocrisy enjoy a self-deception anyone who simply puts trust in the beautiful and the good is either inexcusably in genuine or acting with evil intent the truly moral attitude is suspicion and its greatest success is in exposing criticism of society is obligatory it is impossible to find words lurid and brutal enough to describe the dangers that threaten us this delight in the negative is not however unlimited there exists at the same time an obligation to be optimistic and the failure to observe this obligation does not go unpunished for example anyone who expresses the view that not everything in the intellectual development of the modern period has been correct that is necessary in some essential areas to reflect on the shared wisdom of the great cultures has chosen to make the wrong kind of criticism he finds himself suddenly construct confronted with a resolute apologia for the fundamental decisions of the modern age no matter how much delight one may take indication he is not permitted to call into question the view that the fundamental trajectory of historical development is progress and that the good lies in the future and nowhere else you know I thought a lot about nihilism let's say and and its justification and I think that a very powerful justification for nihilism can be found in the mirror observation that life is rife with tragedy and malevolence of which there is no doubt but then I got suspicious of that rationale for nihilism over the years because a counter position to it emerged and this is something Nietzsche of course concentrated on as well that had more to do with resentment it's like you can imagine negation of the heroic ideal from despair from the despair of save produced by tragedy and by exposure to malevolence but it's also it's completely and delightfully irresponsible to negate heroic ideal because it means that you don't have any responsibilities and it seems to me that if you're nihilistic and prone to criticize the heroic foundation of let's say Western culture that one of the first questions that you could ask yourself is what makes you so sure that you're appropriately cynical suspicious and critical and not just running away as fast as you possibly can from every bit of responsibility that you could possibly adopt and I think that that's a perfectly reasonable perspective and I think that that is reflected to some degree in what the person who wrote this paragraph was attempting to you guess who it was or was that fair no I can't really no ha ha ha ha ha ha I left you a hint off at them who is it Cardinal Ratzinger come ah all right I'm going to take another question and well done hello hello how are you doing doing good dr. Pearson it's been a pleasure 12 weeks 12 12 moments let's say okay so two weeks ago we talked about your mischievous suggestion I might say to cut the university's funding by 25% and how that might have influenced that sort of language and Andrew sheers platform right yeah and so and then you discussed how you're not exactly sure what your role is in all of this and and that you don't want to be in a war and you don't want to be using warlike language and and I think I think what you what you want to be doing is is you're trying to restore order but not not but not but not have conflict and and so I so I so after the after the lecture two weeks ago I asked you like maybe I maybe I should do some sales work for your post modern lexicon website and but I think I've found a better niche for someone of my temperament to help this cause so I think that so I go to the house University and because so many students are dropping out especially men and especially at I think minorities they've created this team called the Student Success team or something Student Success advisors yeah and you've been extracting credibly successful crowdfunding for your research and on your patreon and I think like how much does it cost for a single person to do the self altering program well it's two for one so it's about fifteen dollars okay so okay so nothing then basically um but I was thinking that we could somehow we could incorporate the self authoring program into this into this new advisor committee at Dow so that students can knock yourself out man do it that's what that's the other like the data for the future authoring program is quite clear if students even do it for an hour before they go to university they have a thirty thirty percent less chance of dropping out the first semester so you know and it would really night be nice to see some student organizations that were seriously devoted to facilitating student success you might think that's what student organizations should do in fact well it seems rather self-evident when you think about it but you know so I would say like if you're oriented in that direction get outer so it's a fine plan and it's I like the emphasis of it because you're directing yourself towards the facilitation of individual accomplishment and you're at least going to do very little harm that way and that's a really good start man you know that's that because that's that's what you should think about when you're setting out to make things better the first thing you should think is I'm not so sure I know what I'm doing so why don't I first attempt to do the least amount of harm possible and by concentrating on helping someone develop their own plan and and implement that into the future encouraging them with regards to whatever success they would like to find their way there's a pretty low probability that you're going to act the terror tyrant and and and play a detrimental role so good luck maybe we can communicate thank you yes I'm gonna send you an email thank you very much hi dr. Peterson this is the first of these lectures that I've been here to listen to but I've listened to all of them on YouTube so far oh boy they're not close enough all right wait that's good okay yeah and I've been trying to think up this question since basically the first lecture because I'm a seminary student at an evangelical seminary and a lot of what you've been saying has really been resonating and it's and it's really been fascinating to listen to and you know there's many people who have been asking you questions like what do you believe about the resurrection do you believe in God are you a Christian and all these sorts of things and you know I've been listening very closely to all your answers and have groups of friends on Facebook or bowling following very closely say or what Peterson said this time maybe he's one of us finally or something like that but but at the same time other ways that you explain some of the stories sound very close to what we call theological liberalism you know in the 19th century the idea that using historical critical methods of reading and interpreting the Bible and understanding Jesus more as a moral figure than as a literal historical figure and whose atonement provides satisfaction for man so I tried to figure out what the question was because I could interpret what some of your answers were so I'm going to put it in more of a general way okay where exactly do you see yourself differing from traditional Orthodox evangelical Christianity and and why would you differ there given how much you you seem to understand the importance of the biblical stories and the Western history in Western history okay okay well that's a good that's a good question well I offer obviously I have to answer in a general way I mean I think that one of the things that makes me different is that I take the idea that things are fourteen billion years old seriously you know and and the idea of evolution seriously I mean as Daz does the Catholic Church by the way and so but I don't see that as an impediment to the pursuit that I'm undertaking now I don't know how to bridge that gap precisely but I'm not that worried about it I mean you can't bridge every gap it's just not possible it would require infinite knowledge okay and how so that that's one major because I'm coming at this from the scientific I really am coming at this from the scientific perspective you know like I try to make sure that everything that I talk about is commensurate with current scientific knowledge now current scientific knowledge no doubt is airing in all sorts of ways like I think our notion about exactly how evolution progresses is flawed in many many ways and the recent discoveries in the field of epigenetics which show that you can actually transmit acquired characteristics you know has really put a whole real serious stick in the spokes of the evolutionary bicycle let's say but but then I also think the question is miss asked in some sense because I gave this lecture series a specific title for a specific reason and the lecture series is the psychological significance of the biblical stories now I'm not claiming that my psychological analysis exhausts the significance of the biblical stories you know they have multitudes let's say layers of meaning and some of those layers of metaphysical and some of them are more specifically religious and I'm trying the best I can not to wander into those domains like I do because it's impossible to keep yourself bounded you know when you're a discursive speaker let's say I'm trying to what I'm trying to do is the sort of thing that Jung did essentially is to take a look at these old stories and say okay well let's look at this from the perspective of the human psyche and let's see what the significance can be and not to say that's all the significance there is who knows what significance there is one thing I have learned about the biblical stories is that no matter how deep you go into them you are not at the bottom and so that's been very very interesting to me and god only knows about the metaphysical substructure of reality because human beings certainly don't so I don't I don't want to claim that what I'm doing is a religious interpretation although you know it drifts into that direction I want to stay within the purview of my expertise such as it is and to say well if you look at this psychologically here's what you can extract as as pragmatically existentially and clinically meaningful and the rest of it well the rest of it has to be left in advance and because I don't have the capacity to investigate claims that go beyond that that does not mean that I'm saying that what I'm doing is reducing these stories to their psychological significance even though the psyche is a grand thing I'm not trying to do that it's not reductionistic it's a take on it so people can make up their own minds metaphysically and they also have to make up their own minds about how they're going to act which is really the crucial issue as far as I'm concerned so you bet I I had a question with respect to daddy presented I believe two weeks ago sorry a question with respect to data even presented I believe two lectures ago regarding the use of psilocybin in treatment of mental illness yes yes so subsequently I looked up some of the recently published a literature and one yeah studies that I found extremely striking was one that was published less than a year ago in The Lancet which is a very high-end yes well respected journal yeah and what they looked at was efficacy in patients with severe treatment-resistant depression and what they found is that in 11 out of 12 of the patients they showed significant remittance following it a single dose of the substance up to three months following the single dose without additional dosing so this not only substantiates I suppose my own experiences but when you read some of the commentary or review articles surrounding these types of topics not with respects to depression but things like post-traumatic stress disorder addiction they'll unequivocally state that these types of results are completely unprecedented and the realm of psychiatric medicine yes so I was wondering - good comment as to whether or not that type of this rhetoric is overblown and if not do you see these being more mainstream in your future or suspect they'll fall victim to something along the lines of regulatory capture no I don't well I don't think they're over statements and I think I know some of the people who are engaged in this research and they're actually very conservative people like their brave people but I mean conservative in the best sense you know they're not they're not Timothy Leary yeah and I'm not trying to put down Timothy Leary I'm really not but you know some caution would have been a good thing although you know when something like when the psychedelics burst onto the scene no one had any idea what to do with them right so and we still really don't but the new research is being conducted very very carefully but it is really remarkable that those episodes are used or those terms are used to describe the results because those are the lancet for example is one of the top end medical journals you don't see grand claims in The Lancet right scientists don't write that way there they're trained from the very beginning to downplay their results but they're quite struck by the fact that these effects occur with single doses now I think that what we don't know about psychedelics could fill many many many thick volumes and they're and they're absolutely mysterious in their function purpose effect consequence all of that and I've always thought that it was really appalling that we stopped investigating them back in the 1960s although it's not been that long you know 20 years historically speaking it's really nothing but and no I don't think that there'll be that the research will be stopped by regulatory capture because the people who are doing it now I think learned their lesson from what happened in the 60s and are doing it pretty damn carefully so we can hope that more results like this are produced and that they're replicable and that perhaps they'll prove helpful with any luck yep hi dr. Pederson I found this lecture series really really enthralling and it did why no I spent my time to explain that I might answer the question yeah that's okay all I'll get let you get to the question but I'm curious like what why do you think that is because it's a strange thing to have happen like it's a lecture on the Bible for God's sake you know it's like it's not something you'd go to a venture capitalist with a business plan for so like what what is it about it you think that's been that that's had that effect on you ha I asked you a question instead look I don't want to I don't want to put you on the spot if you want to just move to your question that's fine but if you have an answer to that I would be very interested in doing what it is well it's it's a thrill to encounter a kind of means to a metaphysical system that's so persuasive and potent and I've hadn't really experienced that a whole lot in my life huh that's what universities are supposed to do for people eh that's what universities are supposed to do for people they're not supposed to take people who are barely hanging together and break them and make them weak they're supposed to equate them with the heroic the heroic sub structure of the human psyche so that they can move out into the world and thrive and it's an absolute crime that isn't what's happening so hooray for that occurred to me that the kind of tradition and genre that you are working in here is that of this sermon now are you comfortable with that categorization and why or well see where you go with it haha well that's the essence of my question are these sermons and might no one demo I don't know h er I don't know you know sorry what was the last part light one call you a preacher well you'd certainly call me one and you know I think that there's a certain overlap and the overlap but this is being characteristic of my approach to education right from the beginning because I have some rules about what I lecture what about the topics that I lecture about and the way that I deal with it so the first rule is I don't want to tell you anything that isn't useful I'm a pragmatist you know like I'm an American pragmatist that's part of my philosophical grounding and I believe that knowledge is tool like and that the proper thing to do is to to equip people with the tools to move effectively in the world and so I want to make sure that if I offer a story or a fact for that matter I also say well here here's why you need to know this fact it will actually improve your life or it'll stop you from wandering into a pit which is approximately the same thing and then it will also knowing this will also make you more effective actor in the social world and that will improve the social world right and hopefully that will improve the environmental world etc etc and so I would say to the degree that those who produce sermons are concerned with producing alterations in behavior which is our moral alterations say then I share the same territory with them but I wouldn't say that that's something that should be only relegated to the domain of the sermon because I believe that it is the job of the universities for example especially in the damned humanities to ennoble people and to enable them to adopt the mantle of proper citizenship and that we've forgotten that we've forgotten that or we're avoiding it or refusing it or something like that you know and I think we're using the death of God as an excuse so I think that to the degree that I'm a preacher I'm making an error you know and also to the degree that I'm politicized I'm making an error I'm wandering out of my proper territory when that's the domain that I'm in but when I'm attempting to assemble multiple layers of facts towards a practical end which is what I'm trying to do and the end is the the annulment of the individual right that's my goal then then I'm in my proper domain I'm going to make mistakes you know I'm going to wander out of my territory and I try not to do that but you know it's well it's part of being a fool you're going to make mistakes so yeah thanks very much no problem doc thanks for continuing to do all the cool stuff that makes everyone love you that's great not everyone well uh yeah yeah yeah that's a generalization there's lots of people that seem not to love me yeah and I can't blame him really anyway yeah I'm going to lead into a question here so him in your book maps and rare book maps of meaning uh I got that quote from Dostoevsky about how humankind mankind - given all the cakes in the world yet oh my god so yeah if you get oh my god is right man that's one killer quote that's from notes from the underground eh everyone should read that because everyone's underground and it's a great it's a great little journey through that yeah so it's basically as you give if you have the perfect utopia I often use it basically if you have your most perfect utopia humans will find a way to screw it up yeah it'll go out of the way I do at least yeah because it's what we like we like chaos and the unknown just talked about this yeah that's the thing is is that we're heroic adventurers right we're not we're not Sybarite laying on a beach although when you get the opportunity to do that like make sure you take it but that's that's not what that's not that's not the proper calling of the human soul right we're out there to conquer chaos and the unknown and it's in that we find meaning and that's better than the utopia that's what Dostoyevsky god bless his soul Dostoyevsky had that he was such a genius he had everything that was wrong with communism figured out even before it started amazing really like if you read the possessed or the devil's which I would highly recommend although it's a hard book to get into it takes about a hundred pages to really get get it get moving but Dostoyevsky talks his main character in that novel is a person who's again a very powerful person who's completely possessed by what's essentially the communist ideology and he's very effective at moving it forward and Dostoyevsky lays out brilliantly exactly the catastrophic consequences of that both personally and socially and he did this like thirty years before the Russian Revolution it's just it's uncanny I don't know where the hell that guy was from must have been his epilepsy you know so yeah I'm glad I got y'all excited him keep going here basically I used to use that you know it's kind of late that a lot of that comes from the left-wing this utopia we're going towards with the universal income and the AI and suddenly the whole populations can become insanely creative and with no incentives but it's not that utopia is not there it's not like this thing that hasn't happened yet we're in it we're in it this is the best thing ever and like all of humanity the Western civilization like oh my god putting the material sense I mean oh it's just toilet paper toilet paper it just happened anyway that's so serious like so we have this beautiful thing and people are trying to take it down at all cost and and now we go into the dark phase of my into my question here which is and it actually goes into Charlottesville had you know with with that with with the initial purpose of protecting the statue was a good thing I don't I'm not I don't know about Confederacy except for the big thing but honestly it's a it's a slippery slippery slope and the confused souls who in the bad make this darkened souls for sure not good they screwed up big-time the purpose behind it it's so important because it's going to be fought founding fathers next anyone who ever contributed to anything to Western civilization as we know it is already being it's already being done James Madison High School in the States it's getting renamed because some girls one of the students felt unsafe and so yeah this is a serious issue I wanted like I feel like we're really up against the wall now because now they found their Nazis man the Nazis are flooding the streets now so how do we how do we possibly you know kind of save our cakes you had to bring it up didn't you well having the right degenerated to the identity politics does not seem to be a positive solution so one of the things I would say is that like I understand why the identity politics that has been practiced so assiduously and so devastatingly by the left has been co-opted by the right I understand that but then here's what I would say to the people on the right who are playing that game if you play the game of your enemies and you win you win their game you don't win that's not victory you just become the most successful exponent of their pathology how is that a good thing it's a bad thing so what does that leave people as although as an alternative well I don't think that the Caucasians let's say should revert to being white I think that's a bad idea it's a dangerous idea and it's coming fast and I don't like to see that I think the whole group identity thing is seriously pathological I think we've made big mistakes in Canada I understand why at least to some degree in that respect and that large mistakes are being made all over the Western world where we're making you group identity the most important thing about you I think that's reprehensible I think it's devastating I think it's genocide 'el in its ultimate expression I think it will bring down our civilization if we pursue it we shouldn't be playing that game so what's the alternative you know I've thought for a long time about a political career really forever since I was like 12 really for a long time and I've always decided against it because it seemed to me that the proper level of analysis with regards to the solution of the problem that we're facing isn't political and that's why I think it's a mistake when what I'm doing gets politicized either by me or others I think that the way that you deal with this is to put yourself together I really believe that is that because I think that individual people are far more powerful they're certainly far more evil than they're willing to consider but that's also a sign of their unbelievable power so I think that what you do is you aim high and put yourself together and stay the hell away from the ideologues because they're hiding they're hiding behind a wall they're not able to come out and fight on their own behalf and so the way forward through the ideological mess and that's the lesson of Western culture is to place the individual at the place of paramount importance and to make the group identity emerge only when necessary and secondarily if ever and so you can do that you can do that now you can do that tomorrow like you can put your life together and again as I mentioned to the other young men who asked the question is you won't hurt anyone doing that right you pick up your goddamn responsibilities sort yourself oke fix up your family right and then you can be a force for good in the culture and if enough people do that the ideological mess will just evaporate it'll just disappear I think that's the way you show people the right path forward to is that you say well look um we would like we would like it so much if you could thrive as an individual drop your cult-like affiliation right step out of the shadows the demonic shadows you ideological possession and step forward as a fully developed person into the light do it by example that's your that's your best bet man so that's what it looks like to me I'm going to take one more question and then I'm going to there is a young man from Kentucky here Brian it's Brian here ok so I'm going to answer one more question and I'm going to let you take Mike okay all right good evening dr. Peterson good evening everybody I also want to thank you first for your lectures that I've been following on YouTube mainly and to say that they have been well life changing wouldn't be an overstatement great and I'm one of the crazy people increasing your views on YouTube because I flew in from Belgium last night to be here and and it's like 3 a.m. for me right now and English is not my first language so bear with me I I would have many burning questions to ask you but I thought it was fair and necessary to pick one and it would be this one there are concepts that recur in your lectures with this one you only mentioned once in your early videos on Bill c16 about self-esteem you said you don't believe in the existence of self-esteem the way to teach children they're all special you think you boost their confidence but the only result is that some get a narcissistic the reason why I'm interested in that is about standing up for yourself and it is and when I try to you know do it yeah I see that rational argument facing rationality doesn't get the best result in negotiations that's why you learn how to be socialized by playing rough and tumble it's not an intellectual conversation that gets you socialized so I'm also reading that book suggested about by Stephen Hicks explaining of modernism yes I wasn't really familiar and I've been listening to a lot of talk to him later this week so that might be fun and I'm trying to read with fresh eyes because having it doctrine aided by you of course very critical and there's one more point that I have to agree with the postmodernist and that is the world seems to me as I observe it a place where powers are at play it's not rationality delete that so when I'm in a weak position and I want to fight back not to get resentful I find that it's not a rational argument that will get me there there's something else that I don't do and that I should be doing and I don't know what it is so you see the relation with self-esteem seems to me that people who think of themselves start in a better position in this game ok so ok ok great yeah alright so there's a lot in that question so the first thing is is there's a problem with the measurement of self-esteem and that actually matters because self-esteem is a psychological concept a scientific concept if you like and you have to get the measurement right and you can predict self-esteem almost perfectly by measuring someone's extraversion and subtracting from that their negative emotionality or neuroticism so it's actually just a combination of big five traits and so people who are extroverted who feel a lot of positive emotion and who are and who don't feel a lot of negative emotion score high on scales of self-esteem ok so conceptually it's a non-starter because you're not going to move people's levels of neuroticism let's say by trying to get them to feel good about themselves ok now having said that that doesn't mean that you shouldn't encourage people right now there's this psychologist named Jerome Kagan who's quite a great psychologist developmental psychologist I think he's emeritus at Harvard at the at the at the moment he studied temper mentally inhibited children you can so they're basically kids who are high in neuroticism probably low and extraversion and he found that if those chilled and you can identify them as early as six months right it's very very inculcated in their temperament he found that if you encouraged them in the world you could shift them into a more stable personality configuration and what you basically did was when they were manifesting signs of distress instead of encouraging them to withdraw and retreat which is what they might be attempting to do you encourage them to go out and explore so for example if you have a temper mentally inhibited child and you go to a playground and there's kids out there like you have an extroverted emotionally stable kid three years old as you put them on the ground their feet are already moving right like a puppy over water and you let them go and they just run to the to the kids and they're there and then you have to drag them away but if you have a temper mentally inhibited child the child will sort of stand around your legs and sort of peek out you know and then what you do is wait it out let them watch encourage them to move a little bit forward encourage them to take their steps out into the unknown and the strange land and don't let them withdraw like you can do it you have they're slower to warm up they'll warm up they'll habituate and if you continually expose your inhibited child to the things that make them anxious in measured doses then you can transform their psychophysiological temperament now you're probably not going to shift them way the hell out onto the extroverted emotionally stable end but you can make a big difference that's very different than making them feel good about themselves which is such a you need to curse you need to curse when you discuss that concept right so it isn't the improved their self-esteem it isn't how you feel about yourself right it's how you act effectively in the world and how you're trained to do that so okay now then you were talking about negotiation right and you said well don't you said something like don't people who feel good about themselves aren't they able to negotiate better and it's I know that's a poor paraphrase excuse me but negotiation is actually a practical issue to some degree like the first thing is that you have to figure out what you want because you were saying well it's not merely rational it's like yeah yeah that's for sure you have to bargain from a position of authority let's say not power Authority is a better word but you don't have authority unless you know what you're talking about and unless you can bring some unless you can bring some let's say force it's not that's not the right word you can negotiate without anyone unless you can say no and you can't say no unless you've set yourself up with alternatives so when you go to your boss and you negotiate for a raise you need to have the sort of CV that enables you to go find another job and you have to have your CV prepared and you have to have looked for another job and you have to be able to get one because then you can go in there and say I'm not as productive as I could be at my current level of remuneration it's not reflective of what I'm able to do and I want this and this is what will happen if you give me this this would be the good things that will happen and what do you think of that and the person is going to know even by the way that you hold yourself while you're having the discussion whether or not you're someone with options and you can't fake that well you can but it's not helpful like it just doesn't work for very many iterations you have to it's it's not rationally you're preparing yourself for battle that's what you're doing and you can't be weak when you prepare prepare yourself for battle because if the person says no I'm not giving you a raise which is exactly what they should say because what are they going to do just like sprinkle the money around you need to be able to say okay then there will be consequences that you don't like and that's what it means to say no to someone no means if you continue to push this things will happen that you don't like now in that case it'll be all be part and take my talents with me and if they don't care well then you're in the wrong business or you don't have any talents to begin with right which is so it in order to negotiate properly and then this is more difficult for people who are agreeable for example because there tend to be more conflict averse you have to put yourself in a position where you can you can push back as hard as you're going to be pushed on and that means you have to open your you have to open up your space of available options because otherwise the person says no one that's it you're done well you'll lose that it's it's as straightforward as that now with regards to the self-esteem part is practice on small things because you build the skills forget about the self-esteem it isn't about being confident or feeling confidence or any of that it's about knowing bloody well how to negotiate start with small things you know so you'll notice that there are things in your relationships in particular that aren't the way you want them to be and that you could see how could be improved it's like figure out how they can be improved negotiate with your partner make the incremental improvement keep doing that you'll get better and better at it and then you'll be able to go out and have a harder negotiation in the world so to set a skills there's an attitude behind it you know and it's easier for some people than others but fundamentally it's a set of skills no problem alright so now we have something interesting and I expected to close this off with the floor is yours dr. Peterson I'd like to say thank you for making your videos available online they've had a great effect on me over the last year I actually found them a few years ago but sometime around July or August of last year I got hooked I would wake up at like 5:00 a.m. in the morning to watch your maps of meaning releases the new ones the old ones excetera I found myself inspired by both the academic and technical material as well as what I might term the more fatherly directives or wisdom I shared this with my family and my friends as well as my girlfriend she's here tonight as well she's been following the biblical series but what I'd like to say is thank you for inspiring me to stand up and face something that I've been afraid of all my adult life and thank you for granting me the permission to ask this question here it's actually for my girlfriend will you please stand up you so some might say given that we are a couple of primates full of snakes it's pretty miraculous that we haven't killed each other but I think you're pretty great and we've been talking about commitment and I think I'm ready I know I'm ready to commit to a life with you of sorting ourselves out I'd like to clean some rooms with you and even as scary as the shackles of marriage have been made to sing to us I'm thinking about forever and simply Mao in my words I love you dearly you feel like home I never want to lose that will you marry me if you want to come here so you're saying you're gonna shackle yourself to me and never run away then I shall suffer the rest of my life with you you thank you very much hahahaha thank you very much for showing up again that's a really good to see everybody here so one of the things that I've been realizing as a consequence of going through these stories is that the degree to which they're about individuals is quite remarkable and I think that's really telling you know one of the reasons I prefer Dostoevsky to Tolstoy is because Tolstoy is more of a sociologist he's more interested in the relationship between groups of people this is an oversimplification because obviously Tolstoy is a great author but I like dusty husky better because he really delves into the souls of individuals and I think it's remarkable the degree to which all of the stories that we've covered so far in Genesis are about individuals and they're quite realistic which is quite remarkable - they're not really romanticized to any great degree because all of the people that are regard as regarded let's say as patriarchal or matriarchal figures in Genesis have no shortage of ethical if no shortage of ethical flaws and also no shortage of difficulties in their life and the difficulties are realistic there they're major-league problems you know like familial catastrophes and famine and war and revenge and hatred and all those things it's not a it's not a pretty it's not a pretty book and that's one of the things that makes it great I mean that's one of the things that characterizes great literature right is that it doesn't present you with a whitewashed view of humanity or of existence and that's really a relief I think because as you all know because you're alive there's no such thing as a whitewash existence like you're to be alive is to be in trouble ethically and existentially I've been reading this book recently I'll talk about it a little bit later it's called better never to have a bean and it was written by a philosopher in South Africa in Cape Town name Benatar that's his last name and he basically argues I think it's a specious argument and I think it's artificially constructed but he basically argues that because life is so full of suffering even good lives are very much full of suffering that it's wrong to bring children into the world because the suffering outweighs the good even in good lives and it's actually wrong it would also be better not to exist for exactly the same reason and my sense in reading the book is that he came to that conclusion and then wrote the book to justify it which is actually the reverse of the way that you should write a book what you should do when you're writing a book is you should have a question and you should it should be a real question right it should be one you don't know the answer to and then you should be studying and writing like mad and reading everything you can get your hands on to see if you can actually grapple with the problem and come to some solution and you should walk the reader as well through your process of thinking so that they can come to the well not necessary to the same conclusion but at least track what you're doing and I don't think that's what he did I think he wrote it backwards but then and so I was thinking about it a lot because that's actually a question that I've contended with in my writing there are Memphis da Philly and our satanic figures for example in girth is Faust and also Ivan in in that in the brothers karamasoff who basically make the same case you know that existence is so rife with trouble and suffering that it would be better if it didn't exist at all and the problem I've had with that there's a variety of them but one of the problems I've had with that is what happens if you start to think that way because what I've observed is that people who begin to think that way that isn't where they stop like that they get angry at existence which is what happened to Cain as we saw in the Cain and Abel story and then the next step is to start taking revenge against existence and that cascades until it's revenge against well I think the best way of thinking about it is revenge against God for the crime of being which is I think the deepest sort of hatred that can entertain and and and when you're in the grip of a really deep emotion like a really profound emotion right at the bottom of emotions you're in something that's like a quasi-religious state and that's more or less independent of your belief saying a transcendent deity I mean you can be in a profoundly emotional state that's as deep as it can be and it can have religious significance without that necessarily signifying anything about a transcendent being you know but but then I was thinking you see the problem with that argument is you can gerrymander it endlessly you know because first of all how do you measure suffering and how do you measure happiness it's like how do you assign weights to them and god there's just no way of doing that you have to do it arbitrarily and so you can make an argument that the suffering outweighs the happiness you just wait the suffering more heavily than you wait the happiness and that's the end of that you know and so that's that's a problem but I think there's a deeper problem and I was reading this other book while back as well which was written by the guy who ran the human genome project and I don't remember exactly what it was called but it was something like a scientists case for God is something like that and one of the things he referred to which didn't strike me as hard as it should have to begin with was the he thought that one of the phenomena say that justified a belief in a transcendent being was something like the moral intuition of human beings that you know we have a sense of right and wrong and you know it's certainly in what happens in Genesis in the story of Adam and Eve is that that that story announces the coming of the sense of right and wrong right the knowledge of good and evil and it isn't something we ascribe to animals it's something that's unique to human beings animals can be predators and you know and they can be gentle and and you can have a relationship with them but you never think of an evil cat or you know or an evil wolf even though they're you know they're predatory about human beings we have this capacity to judge between good and evil right and wrong and it's really an integral part of our being and I think you can make an evolutionary case for that a biological case for that as you can make a biological case for most of what is relevant about human beings because we're biological creatures but we don't really understand the significance of that like what happens in the story of Adam and Eve is that that's that realization not coming to the knowledge of good and evil is actually represented as a shift of cosmic significance right it puts a it puts a permanent fracture in the structure of being and you know if you think of human beings as insignificant ants on a tiny dust mote in the middle of an infinite cosmos cosmos that cares less for us then who cares fundamentally if human beings have the knowledge to distinguish between good and evil but if you give consciousness a central role in being and you can make a perfectly reasonable case for that because without consciousness there's no being as far as anyone can determine so it may be much more central than we think and and I really don't think there's a counter-argument to that like not a solid one you can state that consciousness is epiphenomena land and that the world is fundamentally materialistic and it doesn't matter that there's consciousness you can state that but you can make an equally credible case the other way and certainly our lived experience is that consciousness is crucial obviously and we treat each other as if most of the time we're valuable conscious beings and we wouldn't give up our consciousness even though it's often consciousness of suffering and so then I think another problem with the book is that it's it's sort of predicated on the idea that life is for happiness and I don't think that's right and I don't think that's how people experience life and I might be wrong but it seems to me that people experience life as something like a series of crucial ethical decisions it's something like that I mean when I just can't imagine maybe I'm being naive about this but I can't imagine that I can't imagine another being that's like me in in most senses that isn't constantly wrestling in some sense with what the next proper thing to do is it's not like it's obvious it's not bloody obvious and it doesn't mean you'll do the right thing because you don't law lots of times and you know that by your own judgement right because you're making mistakes all the time sometimes you don't know what you're doing and maybe it's a mistake and maybe it isn't and who's to say that isn't what I'm talking and what I'm talking about when you know that what you're doing is wrong and you go ahead and do it anyways people do that all the time and that's also extremely peculiar you bloody well think that if you knew it was wrong and you told yourself that it was wrong that that would be sufficient so that you just wouldn't do it but that isn't what you're like at all you know and you can tell yourself something is wrong a fifty times and you'll do it the 51st time and then you'll feel you know like like you deserve to feel probably and but it doesn't stop you and so so then I think the other problem with the viewpoint the idea that the suffering of life eradicate sits utility is that it's predicated on the idea that happiness or lack of suffering even is is the right criteria by which to judge life and I don't think that's how we actually experience life I think what we do instead is put ourselves through a series of excruciating moral choices you know when one of the things that that's really significant about the biblical stories and I think about the the entire implicit philosophy you know that's embedded in the stories is that that's how life is presented in in the stories is all of these individuals first they're individuals - not groups and second they're agonizing over their moral choices all the time all the time and they have a relationship with God and but it's not a it's not a directive relationship exactly even for the people to whom God speaks directly which I suspect is not something you'd exactly want to have happen is it's there's still even the fact that they have a direct relationship with God doesn't stop them from being tormented continually by their moral choices and so the world is presented as a moral landscape not as a not as a place that justifies itself by happiness it's presented as a moral landscape and people are presented as preachers who traverse through the moral landscape making ethical decisions that determine the course of the world and that seems to me to be right and that's not a that's not the same as happiness by any stretch of the imagination it's a whole different category of being and you know and then I thought that through a lot and I think well we do make choices and what we do is contend with the future you know and that the future seems to appear to us as a realm of possibility that's a more accurate way of thinking about it then then that the future presents itself to it to us as a realm of determined things it's it's presents itself as a realm of possibility and there's good choices in that realm and there's poor choices or even evil choices in that realm and we're negotiating continually deciding which of those choices we're going to bring into being that seems to me to be phenomenologically indisputable and we certainly treat each other as if that's what we're doing because we hold each other responsible for our actions you know with some exceptions and that we're deciding each moment whether to make things better or worse and that seems to me to be correct and I think that that's what these stories illustrate they don't say that directly you know although I think it gets more and more explicit as the narrative unfolds but and then part of the realism of the stories is that the people aren't the people that are being presented are by no means good I mean maybe with the exception of Noah no one seemed to be a pretty good guile they did he did get drunk and you know and and end up naked exposed to his sons and so forth and but I mean he isn't talked about a lot as a character it's a pretty compressed story but Abraham I mean Abraham had plenty of problems not least of which was in his inability to leave home and then you know his lying about his wife and their there's all sorts of mistakes and then Jacob who were going to talk about tonight is an even more morally ambivalent character he's especially at the beginning of the story he's it's it's he isn't the sort of person that you would pick out especially if you were a hack writer you wouldn't pick him out as the hero of the story he does a lot of things that are really pretty reprehensible and takes him an awful long time to learn better and yet he's the person who's put forward as the father of the 12 tribes of Israel it's from this flawed person that the people that that may be that whose story you might say is that the fundamental constitutes the fundamental underpinning of our culture it's it's from this deeply flawed individual that that group emerges and so you might think of that as a relief to because you know you're no knight in shining armor you know with with a with a pure moral past I mean people make mistakes of catastrophic proportions non-stop you know and that also means that these stories put forward something approximating hope because in their realism in their moral realism they present heroes I suppose the heroes of renown right the patriarchs of old let's say who are realistic people who have fits of anger and rage and who are murderous at times and who are deeply deeply embroiled with family dispute and and who who have adulterous affairs and and like they do all the terrible things that people do and the weird thing is is that God is still with them and you know it isn't obvious what that means or even if it means anything but it's very it's not disputable as far as I can tell that a were conscious and that consciousness is a transcendent phenomena which which we do not understand and that the landscape that we traverse through is moral like every story you ever watch anything that grips your imagination on the screen or in the theater like any story that grabs you is a story of moral striving it's just not interesting otherwise right the person has to be confronted with complex moral choices and then you see the outcome and you know the good guy doesn't and the bad guy does it badly and things don't go so well for the bad guy generally and if it's a bit more sophisticated than good and the bad are in the same individual and that's you know that's a more compelling story but so we could say well let's we could make the assumption that it might be worthwhile thinking of the world as a as it has been thought of classically as a theater upon which the forces of good and evil continually strive for dominance and I for the life of me especially after I started reading deeply into 20th century history and all the terrible things that happened in the 20th century and all the terrible unbelievably incomprehensible things that people did to one another I just couldn't see seeing things any other way is realistic you know because I don't think that you can immerse yourself in 20th century history without coming to the conclusion that evil is a reality and if it's a reality that it depends on what you mean by reality but it's fundamental enough reality for me and if it's a reality then I don't see how you can escape from the conclusion that the cosmos as we experience it at least is a place of moral striving and well that's one of the things that's really illustrated in the story of Jacob and and I found that quite striking so so the last time last lecture I ended with the Abrahamic stories with the death of Sarah and that was Abraham's wife and so we're gonna continue from from there remember Abraham had a son Isaac and he was asked by God to sacrifice his son which we talked about in in some depth and I was attempting to make the case that you know the idea of sacrifice was one of humankind's great discoveries because it meant the discovery of the future essentially but it also meant the discovery that the future was something that you could make a bargain with and that you could give up something now something impulsive some pleasure even a deep pleasure in the moment and you could strive and hypothetically you could make a covenant a bargain with the future and if your sacrifices were acceptable and that seemed to mean an ethically acceptable you had to sacrifice the right thing that that vastly increased the probability that not only you would be successful let's say but that your descendants would be too and I don't think that that's an irrational proposition I mean you have to leave in it a bit with the realization that sometimes you know you get sliced off at the knees no matter what right because life has an arbitrary element and and that can't be tossed out but building in the arbitrary element will say you still want to think well what's your best bet given a certain amount of randomness and it seems to me that conscious self-aware sacrifice and proper ethical striving is your best bet and you know there's another idea that well I've always explained it when I've explained it to people I've always used the movie Pinocchio as an example you know that when Geppetto was trying to make his puppet into a self-aware and autonomous moral agent which is what he wants above all else you know he aims at the highest good that he can conceive which is the star that he prays to essentially and hopes for the transformation and there's also something in that that's unutterably profound and maybe that is somewhat independent of the idea that you have to believe in God I would also say that what it means to believe in God in the old testament is by no means clear and that's something I also really want to talk about tonight it's not obvious what it means and well Gepetto what he does at least is aim at the highest good of which he can conceive you know and that that's actually in a philosophical definition of God upon occasion that God is the highest good of which you conceive and you know that's different than the idea of a transcendent being precisely but it's in line with it's in line with certain interesting psychoanalytic speculations this is one of the things I really liked about Carl Jung you know Jung was so radical a thinker it's just beyond belief like I've read a lot of critics of you and I've always I've always got too kicked out of them because the things they accused Jung of are so trivial compared to the things that Jung actually did that it's like accusing a murderer of jaywalking like because Jung was unbelievably radical like here's one of his ideas you know he thought that it was necessary he believed that psychotherapy could be replaced by a supreme moral effort and so the moral effort would be something like aiming after good and then trying to integrate yourself around that and that the the good at which you aimed would be something approximating what you would be like if you manifested your full potential and that you have a glimmering of what that full potential was so that would be the potential future you and he thought of that he thought of people as four dimensional entities especially essentially that were stretched across time and that you as a totality across time including your potential manifested yourself also in the here and now and that part of what your potential manifested itself was something like the voice of conscious conscience or intuition it's amazing idea it's an amazing idea right because it's like what you could be in the future beckons to you in the present and helps you determine the difference between good and evil it's a mind-boggling idea and you know I think that it's an idea you have to contend with and then he went further than that and this is this is also remarkable idea you know he was interested in this symbolic representation of Christ and I mean psychologically speaking and he thought of Christ as the representation of the ideal potential human it's something like that so it was a symbolic rip thats what Christ was is a symbolic representation of the ideal potential of a human being and so for young there was no difference between there was no psychological difference between who you could be in the future beckoning to you and the prey in the present and orienting yourself in relationship to Christ psychologically those were the same thing and then so that's a pretty mind-boggling idea like seriously that's a mind-boggling idea you know especially when you add the psychological idea that the one of the things that characterizes your ideal future self is the ability to make sacrifices right and the deeper the sacrifice the better and then also to recover from the sacrifice right so that's the death and rebirth so the part of you that's most essential to your full flowering as a as a being is your ability to let things go and then spring back from that so to die in some sense and to be reborn in the service of a higher good and then well then the next part of that is that the direction of the world depends on you doing that so not only your own life but your family's life and and because we're networked so intently together you know that the whole panoply of humankind that may be the structure of the of the cosmos and you know you might think well no but you know it's not so simple it's not so simple first of all one person can wreak an awful lot of havoc there's absolutely no doubt about that and as we get more technologically powerful that becomes even more relevant and important and and and crucial you know one of the things that Young said was that we had to wake up because we are too technologically powerful to be as morally asleep as we are and that seems to me just to be self-evident that's yeah for sure that's true we're we're we're half asleep with nuclear bombs it's not a good idea it's seriously not a good idea and so well and then you might ask yourself - you don't well like what is the ultimate potential of a fully developed human being and well we certainly know that you have admiration for people who are more developed rather than less developed that's that just happens automatic or resentment that but that's okay it's the same thing it doesn't matter but it's not like you can't identify them you can identify them you know and and they're put forward to you in in in drama and fiction and all of that constantly so that's another form of moral intuition you know you can write you can discern the wheat from the chaff let's say and and so the other thing that I was thinking about that's worth consideration too is that you know and maybe this is maybe this is petty but I don't think it is somebody asked me the other day if I believed in miracles and I hate being asked questions like that you know and you know it's also people ask me do I believe in God and like I don't know what they mean when they say that and so I don't know what the answer because I don't think we're talking necessarily going to talk about the same thing but in any case I said yes and I have a variety of reasons for that but one of them is that you know the consensus among physicists is that we can track the origin of the cosmos to something like a hundred millionth of a millionth of a second after the Big Bang it's like it's so close to the Big Bang that the difference is literally infinitesimal but the consensus is that before that whatever that is the laws of physics themselves break down well what what do you call an event that exists outside the laws of physics that by definition that's a miracle now that doesn't necessarily mean that there's a transcendent Adi that caused the event that's a separate issue but it does imply a barrier of some sort beyond which we can't go where some other set of rules apply and so I find that interesting as well so all right so Sarah dies and Abraham makes a bargain with the Hittites to purchase a burial place for her and they offer it as a gift and he insists upon paying for it it's a little story that basically indicates two things that Abraham was the kind of guy that you trust pretty much when you see him and that even if something is offered to him as a gift he's going to do everything to be reciprocal about it and and so it's not a massively important part of the story but it's it's in keeping with the same narrative flow and so Efron who's a hit I'd offer Zabar you'll place as a gift and Abraham says no you know you have to let me pay for it and Efrain says he will and that works out very well and so he has a good burial place for his wife and then Abraham decides that Isaac needs a wife and so he sends his eldest servant to Mesopotamia to find a wife for Isaac and there's a strange ritual that's performed so it says in the story that the servant places his hand under Abraham's thigh to to swear but that isn't really what it means it means that he places his hand I don't know exactly how to say this properly well use your imagination how about that and the idea is that as far as I can tell that he's swearing on the future he's swearing on future people it's something like that so that's that's sort of what testified means right think about the route well I'm not kidding I'm not kidding that is what it that's that is the derivation right it is the derivation so so so anyways this is a serious issue and so that servant has to go and find Isaac a good wife and he wants him to find Isaac wife who is willing to accept the same fundamental belief system which is something like the belief in a god that's a unity rather than a plurality you know the other thing that Jung was very insistent upon was that there was a relationship between polytheism and psychological confusion and monotheism and psychological unification I really like that idea too that you know that what you're trying to do because you are a plurality that that's one of the things the psychoanalysts we're really good at figuring out that the cognitive scientists haven't touched yet as far as I could tell they're way behind the psychoanalysts in that element of thinking is that you are composed of sub personalities which all have their own desires and their own viewpoint their own thoughts and their own perceptions and they're in a war with each other constantly maybe even a Darwinian war it's been it's been portrayed that way by certain neuroscientists and that that one of the goals of life is to integrate all of that plurality into a hierarchical ethical structure that has some canonical ethic at the pinnacle right we've talked a little bit about that and it's not obvious what should be at the pinnacle but we can guess at it it's it's that which we admire that's one way of thinking about it it's that that describes fair play across a sequence of games that's another good way of thinking about it it's it's the heroic ideal that's another way of thinking about it but it's it's combined with generosity you know because the hero the mythological hero goes out into the unknown and slays the dragon and gets the gold but then comes back to the community and distributes what's found and so it's courage plus generosity and and so all of your all of that interior struggling that you're doing is an attempt to bang yourself against the world with challenge constantly to hit everything together like you're beating on a piece of iron to to to cure it let's say so that you don't you're not an internal contradiction you're not massive competing gods something like that because it's just too psychologically stressful and hard on everyone else and impossible for them to get along with you if you're one thing one moment and another thing another moment and so so anyways Abraham insists that Isaac find a wife from among people who are likely to carry off forward the monotheistic tradition and I'm not sure that the monotheistic tradition is actually indistinguishable is actually distinguishable from the individualistic tradition I think they might be the same thing at different levels of analysis you know so because individual means undivided in some sense right to be an individual means to be one thing and the other thing that mitigates against the idea of life as happiness is it isn't obvious to me that it's happiness that is what molds you and shapes you you know it's something more like optimal challenge voluntarily undertaken it's something like that right and I think that's echoed in the idea that everyone has a moral obligation to raise their cross something like that to accept the fact of their mortality voluntarily I believe that that's the case and I do actually think that that's a prerequisite to proper psychological development because if you're not willing to take your mortality on voluntarily like if you're kicking and fighting about it constantly and you have every reason to don't get me wrong then you can't act forthrightly in the world right you're going to be afraid and when you're afraid then you can't voluntarily take on a challenge and then if you can't take voluntarily take on a challenge then you can't develop and so again the life seems to be something like if it's a proper life is the voluntarily voluntary taking on of great challenges and maybe that's better than happiness like it's certainly more noble you know it's not a word we use very much anymore the idea of nobility because we're so obsessed with happiness but I think happiness is a like if it comes along man great you know wonderful don't don't take it lightly or for granted because it's fleeting but the idea that that's what you should be for in some sense - seems to me if that's what life is for then maybe it shouldn't be maybe that's correct because that isn't what life is but so doesn't it isn't obvious to me that that's what life should be you know I mean if you really loved someone like like your son let's say what do you say well I hope he has a happy life or would you say I hope he accomplishes great things it seems to me that that's better the accomplishing of great things and because that's admirable you know it's like a happy person is a happy person but a noble person is an admirable person and and that's that's better man and so maybe there are better things than happiness and so you can't judge being on the basis of the ratio of suffering to pleasure something like that it's and I don't think we do that I don't believe we do that I mean comedians are happy right but everyone doesn't aspire to be a comedian and you don't watch comedy all the time even though you could laugh non-stop more or less if the comedian's funny you want to get your teeth into something it also seems to me that this is one of the reasons I like the existential philosophy was that you know the existentialist believed it's sort of an original sin idea they believed that we came into the world with an ethical burden already laden upon us something like something like that and that we had a felt sense that it was necessary for us to justify our being and if we didn't do that then we weren't authentic to ourselves we weren't moving towards individuality we weren't sustaining the community we weren't living properly and that and that that idea was deeply embedded in people as part of their ordinary experience and that also seems to me to be accurate and you know I've dealt with lots of people say in my clinical practice and they don't really cut they are they will come and say I wish I wasn't so unhappy but they don't usually come and say I wish I was happier and those things aren't the same and and then when we when you talk to people who are having trouble you know they want to straighten things out and figure out how to do them right it's something like that and and that that's the primary that's their primary goal and so anyways Abraham sends his eldest servant off to his the place that God has granted him to find a wife and interestingly the borders of the promised land are quite similar to the current borders of Israel in these are estimates right based on on the biblical and I mean that's not a fluke obviously but it's it's interesting to see the concordance between these ancient stories and the present-day world so I thought that was very interesting and it shows once again that the past you think the past is the past but it's not it's it's still here it's embedded in the present you know just like the future and somehow in some ways is folded up inside the present waiting to unfold the past is all folded up inside the present too so anyways the servant goes to the land that he's been charged to go to and and he's trying to figure out how in the world am I going to find a good wife for Isaac I mean I don't know any of these people and so he has this little dialogue that's presented in the form of a prayer I suppose and he thinks well I'm gonna go to the place where you water where people get water and water the animals and because that's a place where everyone gathers so that's a good place to find someone and and it's it's not a place of fun and lightness and relaxation and impulsivity it's a place of life-sustaining work and and he thinks something like well what would a decent girl do at a watering place and he thought well maybe she would offer a stranger some water and also offer to water the camels because that would be brave to approach the stranger and then generous and then indicative of the willingness to make an effort and when you know that a camel I think he took ten camels was quite a few camels anyways just one and that a camel can drink 20 gallons of water and Rebecca who was drawing water from the wet turns out to be Rebecca I was drawing water from the well which is hard right because water is heavy and you have to lift it up and it's ten camels and so that's like 200 gallons of waters so you know she has to put herself out a fair a bit in order to make this stranger happy and so that's what happens and then the servant has brought along gifts and that sort of thing and anyways to make a long story short Rebecca agrees to come back to come back with the servant and huh marry Isaac and so then she has she gets pregnant and she has twins and this is an interesting thing the twins fight inside her she can tell that that they're not getting along and this is an echo right it's an echo of Cain and Abel and there's a mythological motif that the unions have called the hostile brothers the hostile brothers and you see them all the time Batman and the Joker are hostile brothers and Thor and Loki or hostile brothers and it's an unbelievably common motif and you know the ultimate hostile brothers are Christ and Satan so that's the that's the archetypal representation of the hostile brothers right the ultimate good and the ultimate evil and so and so it's an echo of the cain and abel story although it's a little more complex I would say from a literary point of view because it isn't obvious which of these brothers is Cain and which of them is Abel they have parts of both in each of them so Esau who turns out to be one of the brothers in Jacob movie turns out to be the other both have their admirable qualities and their faults anyways Esau comes is born first but Jacob has him by the heel and so there was a fight within the womb to see who would emerge first now that's relevant because the firstborn had a special status well has a special status in many communities especially agricultural communities and there's a reason all these people were more herds people but if you divide your property equally among all your children then in like three generations everybody has one goat and everybody starves to death you know or the same thing happens with lands so one of the ways that that traditional communities solve that is they just give them almost everything to the firstborn and then the everyone else knows well you go out and do whatever you can and it's kind of arbitrary and unfair but you know at least it's predictably arbitrary and unfair instead of doom over for generations you know so it actually mattered to be the firstborn and and God generally favors the firstborn and then you might think well what is it about being born first that's so relevant apart from the the cultural practice of abort generous inheritance and I would say well the firstborn is something like the model for the leader of the family right because the firstborn child should be if there's a number of siblings they should take care of the siblings at least to some degree but also should be a role model for them so it's like a natural position of leadership but there's a site there's a cycle psychologize ation of the idea of the firstborn in these stories because god often passes over the firstborn in favor of a later born child he seems to do that on the basis of moral character essentially and so there's this idea that well there's a natural proclivity towards leadership that's just a biological fact that would be associated with being a firstborn but there's a element of characterological development that transcends that and so that you it's more important to be spiritually a firstborn let's say than to be biologically a firstborn and God recognizes that continually in these stories and inverts the natural order and favors a later born who's who's done more work with regards to characterological development and that's also interesting to you know I've talked to lots of business people about leadership and there's a literature on leadership but it's not a good literature it's it's pretty shallow partly because it's not that easy to define leadership and partly because there are different you know you people have different temperaments and different temperaments can be leaders they just do it in different ways now there's something in common about being a leader though and I would say one is that if you're an actual leader you actually know where you're going right because what are you gonna do lead people in circles it's like maybe they'll follow you but you're not a leader you're just a charlatan so you have to know where you're going and then you have to be able to communicate that and then people have to trust you so you actually have to be honest because people are at that stupid at least not for a long period of time and then where you're going has to have some value because otherwise why would anyone want to go along with you so and then you might say well what what are the attributes then that make you a leader and I would say well they're characterological fundamentally and this is not naive optimism or or or casual moralizing it has nothing to do with that you know we know for example that conscientiousness that the personality trait is a good predictor of long-term success in in most occupations not all but most and that one of the things that's associated with conscientiousness is that people keep their word they're trustworthy and that's certainly one element of a leader especially across any reasonable amount of time you have to be able to trust the person they can even be harsh right it doesn't matter because you can see harsh leaders and kind leaders but as long as they do what they say they will do then then you can follow them and you know that the future payoff is is is secure something like that so the idea that character logical development is more important to leadership than primogenitor I think that's the right word primal Genesis anyways being a firstborn that's a very crucial psychological realization that it's character logical development that makes you favored of God you know and I do think we've forgotten this in many ways because there isn't a lot of emphasis in our education system on characterological development and that's very very surprising to me I think maybe it's partly because in our fractured society we can't agree on what constitutes a reasonable characterological goal so we just throw up our hands and don't educate our kids to any degree at all especially in schools about what an admirable person is like or even let them know that well maybe you should actually try to be one you know that that's actually the most important possible thing that you could learn right so and I also think and I think this is laid out very thoroughly in the biblical stories as well is that if there are enough people who are admirable then things work and if there aren't and things things are terrible you get wiped out you remember when Abraham is bargaining with God with regards to Sodom and Gomorrah he asks God to save the city if there's like 40 admirable people right respectable but let's say admirable right I don't want I don't want to say good because good is being corrupted in some sense by casual usage I mean admirable noble people right I think Abraham bargains got down to like ten if there's ten of them in the city the city won't be destroyed and that that's not very many in this city so there's an interesting idea there which is that there there doesn't have to be that many people in a group who have their act together but zero is the wrong number and if it's zero then then we're seriously in trouble and I think that goes along with the idea of the Pareto principle in economics too which is that it's a small minority of people who do most of the productive work in any given domain but so so a small number of properly behaving people might have enough of an impact to keep everything moving and that might also that might actually be true but it can't fall below some crucial level and I do think that we're in some danger of allowing it to fall below some crucial level because our society seems to be at war in some ways against the idea of the individual and individual character per se and I think that's absolutely I think that's absolutely catastrophic and that's part of the reason that I'm doing these biblical lectures you know because I think that I've known for a long time that the moral presuppositions of a culture are instantiated in its stories they're not instantiated in its explicit philosophy there might be a layer of explicit philosophy and of course there is in the West and a layer of explicit law but underneath that there are stories and there isn't anything under the stories except maybe behavior you know and that's so implicit it doesn't even actually count it's not a cognitive operation and so this is the story these are the stories that are underneath our culture and so there better be something to them that's what we hope and but more importantly maybe we shouldn't toss them away without knowing what they mean because if we toss them away then we're throwing everything that we depend on away as far as I can tell and we'll we will pay for it we'll pay for it individually because we'll be weak you know because if you're not firm in your convictions then someone else who's firm in their convictions can you're their puppet like instantly and then you're also the puppet of your own doubts right because unless you have convictions you're gonna generate doubts like mad because everyone does and then the doubts win and and you'll be paralyzed because there'll be you know 50% of you moving forward and 50% of you frozen stiff and that'll be enough just to lodge you in place and so okay so there's a psychologize ation of the idea of leadership which is very important and then it's associated with the idea of character or logical development and it's associated with the idea of struggle not happiness and it's also associated with this Abrahamic idea which I really liked and which was something that's been very useful to me as a consequence of doing these lectures because remember at the beginning of the Abrahamic stories abraham's like a stay-at-home guy right he's like the guy who's 40 years old living in his in his in his mother's basement and god says like get the hell out of there you know get out in the world where you belong go do something difficult because what you're doing isn't acceptable and you know the first thing he does is go somewhere there's a terrible famine and then he goes somewhere there's a tyranny so you know it's it's pretty funny he follows God's call and it's not like sweetness and light and paradise immediately it's nothing like that it's it's instantaneous combat you know of the most difficult kind so but but Abraham does in fact follow that impulse and you know it's interesting too I mean I don't know here's another thing that made me a really an advocate of psychoanalytic thinking and it was the sort of thing that started to terrify me about what the human psyche was out like I started to understand that not only were we like an amalgam of relatively autonomous subpersonalities each of which had the possibility of gaining control but that we were also victim you might say or beneficiary of impulses that were beyond our conscious formulation or or or understanding or capacity to resist so here's this here's a funny story so I was talking to one of my patreon people online this week and he said he was a committed atheist and that's fine you know lots of atheists are very honest people and they're atheists because they don't know how to reconcile what they know with traditional claims let's say and they're not willing to just mangle them together you know and there might be cynicism all that associated with it as well but he said he was he said he was entranced by these biblical lectures you know which is pretty weird and he said if someone would have told him a year ago that he was going to like be obsessed with the sequence of biblical lectures he would have told them that they were mad and so we had a bit of a discussion about that and because this is an interesting thing you know and he mentioned this he said it was something like you don't choose your interests they choose you and that's really worth thinking about to man because you know it's really hard to get interested in something you're not interested in even if you know there's a good reason for it you know you're studying for an exam you find the material boring you know anything will be more interesting than than the studying even though you know that that's what you need to do you can't voluntarily grab yourself by the scruff of the neck let's say and shake yourself and say sit down and concentrate your mind will just go everywhere but then if you're interested in something and even if it's something you shouldn't be interested in because that happens all the time then it's like you're a laser focus man you can pay attention forever you can work until you're exhausted you won't even notice it then you remember everything it's like okay if you can't control your interest what does and man I tell you you can think about that for a very long time so Jung talked about the spirit mercurius you know Mercury's the winged messenger of the gods and and here's how he conceptualized it psychologically he thought is what the ancient people who thought about mercury has the winged messenger of the gods were trying to state psychologically you know your your interest Flitz around it's like there's something that captures it and that moves your interest from place to place you know like if you walk into a bookstore you'll get interested in a particular book it's as if the book grips you is you don't know why you're interested in that you might but often you don't know why you're interested in that book and you know your interest is flitting around and so that's mercury the thing that makes your interests like flicker around is mercury the winged messenger of the gods and mercury is the messenger of the gods because it's the things behind the scenes psychologically that are manipulating your attention and for Jung those were equivalent in some sense to the lost gods and so for Jung your your interest was being manipulated behind the scenes by unseen forces that were associated with your character illogical development across time that was the manifestation of the self so the self is this the the potential you let's say and the way it operates in the present is by gripping your interest in directing it somewhere and that's part of the instinct of self-realization it's a mind-boggling idea man really it's I think it's correct I can't see how it can't be correct it doesn't mean I understand it completely but it certainly seems phenomenologically correct and I mean the potential that you are has to manifest itself somehow in in the here and now it has to and what better way than by directing your attention you know it's like it seems like this might be useful for you or maybe you get attracted to this person or maybe you admire this person that happens with kids a lot they'll admire someone and then copy them and you can see that that's obviously part of their developmental progression right it's a form of hero worship but kids are very imitative and they hero worship at the drop of a hat and so they're they're entranced by the the next stage of development and if they see someone who embodies that especially if it's in the zone of proximal development it's it's um it's something they could achieve stretching a bit they find someone who embodies that next stage of development and then they start to imitate them and act like them well we're adults are no different we're no different we're just we do it at a perhaps more abstract and sophisticated level so okay so Jacob and Esau are hostile brothers there they're like Cain and Abel except the mixture of Cain and Abel and they're very different Esau was red and covered with hair he was a hunter and a man of the field so he's like your basic jock right he's extroverted he's outgoing he's really tough he's like extraordinarily masculine he hunts and he's a real favorite of his father and so and and Jacob isn't he's a dweller in tents and yeah right exactly exactly exactly right and it says Isaac loved Esau but Rebekah loved Jacob now that's a problem right that that's a big problem and that there's a Freudian element to this it's like this family is now divided because one child is the favorite of the mother and that's Jacob and one child is the favorite of the father and so Jacob is kind of a mother's boy I guess to use an rather archaic phrase and certainly not as admirable from his father's perspective as Esau who's a tough guy who goes out with a bow and arrow and like you know wanders around in the plains and brings animals home and and he's tough he's a tough guy so and but but there's this discord in the family because one parent prefers one child and the other parent prefers the other and it's obvious from the story that the parents do not communicate about this because they really take sides and so there's a split in the family and that's I think very realistic because one of the things that you do learn if you have a family and of course most of you do but if you also think about families is that there's there's deep divisions within families very very frequently that no one will ever talk about and or even think about often because it's too painful to think about you know and Freud himself said Freud was clearly his mother's favorite and the family sacrificed a lot including some of the potential ambitions of the other children in order to kind of put Sigmund Freud up on a pedestal and and advance his education and it worked I mean you know he turned into a great man but there was a cost to his siblings and Freud himself said that there was something about being the favorite of the mother that gave a person additional confidence throughout their life and you know there's there's something to be said about that even someone like Eric Erickson you know he noted that very interested in child development that that first bonding with the mother was the it was the place where trust was established maybe trust even in the goodness of existence was established and so anyways Jacob is Rachel's favorite and he saw his Isaac's favorite now he saw being extroverted let's say is also a bit impulsive and maybe he's not he's a man of action he's not a forward thinker and but he's also doing hard work and so you know he goes out and he's hunting and he's worn out and he comes home and he's faint with hunger and Jacob is at home cooking he's boiling up lentils red lentils and you know Esau comes in from the hunt and he's like half starved to death and he's sitting there in the aroma of these red lentils reaches them and he's exhausted and and and he tells Jacob that he wants some of this stew and Jacob who's being a pain in the neck fundamentally they basically says no there's a there's a teasing thing going on here and and we won't give him any and and and there's you have to imagine this because it's not laid out explicitly in the story but there's some dispute about whether Esau gets to have lunch and Jacob finally says well I'll give you some but you have to you have to give me your birthright and he saw you think he must say something like you know well to hell with it take it you know you son of a bitch take it just give me some damn stew it's something like that so that's what happens but you know with these archaic people once he made a statement like that that was you were done that was it and so Esau sells his birthright and this turns out to be incredibly significant Manson who wrote biblical commentary said oh there's a bit of a twist to it so Esau eats the the red lentils and then from then on his name is red and you've got to use your imagine in a bit I mean people are making fun of him right that's why they're calling him red I mean he's already red because we established that but no one was calling him red before this and so for the rest of his life you know every time he goes out amongst his friends and family they call him red and sort of snicker because he's the you know half famished idiot who sold his birthright for a bowl of lentils and so it's it's not it's not that funny actually and so Esau is not happy about this and and it actually turns out that this so what does it mean it means don't sell the future for the desires of the present and don't be casual about what you have and then there's an archetypal element to this too and Benson says various have been the opinions what this birthright was which Esau sold but the most probable is that together with the right of sacrificing so determining what should be sacrificed and when and being the priest of the family it included the peculiar blessing promised to the seed of Abraham that of being the progenitor of the Messiah and the error of the special promises of God respecting Christ's Kingdom it was at least typical of spiritual privileges those of the firstborn that are written in heaven well that's a lot harsher than meets the eye to begin with and so there's a very interesting deep moral story there which is it's sort of Esau does the opposite of a sacrifice it's the reverse right he sacrifices the future for the present and so the story basically says the way it's laid out across stories is that if you're the sort of person that sacrifices the future to the present then that eradicate the possibility that you will bring the the most noble being into existence that's what it means and you can again this is the psychological significance of the biblical story so that's a bad thing to do if you want to realize your potential let's say you don't do reverse sacrifices that's a very bad idea and so Esau really did himself in by being too attached to the present without a vision of the future so he's - in the moment you know and and he pays a heavy price for it I mean he's the first of all he loses his birthright and and his double inheritance so there's a practical consequence and then there's a spiritual consequence and then he's well he's been made a fool of by his brother Jacob means supplanter by the way that's what the name means and Jacob is always trying to usurp Esau as we see and so Jacob gets one over on him and you know that's not doesn't make an older brother happy when a younger brother gets something over on him that's for sure and then he loses the opportunity to be the progenitor of the Messiah which is like people already didn't realize that precisely but it seems to be you know it's kind of rough that so and then there's there's a statement in Matthew 16:26 for what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul or what shall a man give in exchange for a saw it's an echo of the same idea you know when you think well what is this idea of soul mean and it's not intellect it said it's something like it's something like consciousness allied with character I think and I think the reason that it's valued so much is that because you got to ask yourself well what do you really have when it comes down to it so life is suffering let's say and you know you can you can pile up worldly goods and the God in the Old Testament doesn't seem to have anything against that really right the people who he favors seem to prosper quite nicely in the world but they also have to make a choice between whether they're going to fundamentally sustain their character or whether they're going to prosper in the world when push comes to shove and the idea constantly is that really what you have in the world that allows you the best possible defense against the suffering that's intrinsic to being is your character that's what you have period and I don't think there is anything that's more psychologically true than that you know because everything else well first of all your relationships with others depend on your character and certainly this is part of the story of Noah's Ark you know because his generations were perfect so he had a very tight familial arrangement everyone trusted each other that's a big deal if you hit a rocky patch in your life right and it's character that it's character that determines that you know if you're generous and honor and all of those things and people know they can rely on you assuming they're not resentful that's a whole different story then they're gonna come to your aid when when it's necessary they're gonna pull together with you and you know when people are really after you for one reason or another and they're accusing you of all sorts of things and you're guilty because you you have a past it's laden with characterological errors then it's very easy for people to take you down because they'll poke until they hit a place where you're guilty and then you're done because you'll do yourself in with your own judgment and so well so ESO makes a very big mistake and there's a sacrificial idea here too which is you know now and then you're going to be faced with a situation where it's something you really want or your character maybe you'll have to lie about something you know and you'll think what difference does it make you know a lie about it Jacob does this but the problem there's a bunch of problems with that one is that well now you know that you're the sort of person that will in fact deceive yourself about the nature of reality if something shiny is dangled in front of you and that's not good because it undermines your faith in yourself and when you're really in trouble they call that the dark night of the soul when you're really in trouble that's what you've got you've got whether or not you can trust yourself and that's it you know when things are really harsh and so if you've betrayed yourself in that manner then you weaken yourself under the worst possible circumstances and that's just that's really not a good thing so this is very practical advice it's not casual moralizing there's very little casual moralizing in these stories in the next part of this story there's some parallels with Abraham and that's built into the narrative I think because Isaac is Abraham's descendants and so we have to keep the narrative echoing forward otherwise it loses its its continuity and there's a famine in the land that Isaac sin and God tells him to stay the course anyways repeating the promise he he gave to Abraham although Isaac goes to AB Emelec also telling the King and people that Rebecca was his sister exactly what Abraham did when he went to Egypt and so there's another echo there of the same the same it's as if the story is being told for a second time essentially and that's supposed to remind you of the of the previous story but they're careless the King sees that Rebekah and Isaac are intimate together and luckily he doesn't have them put to death he just tells everybody in the kingdom that they're to be left the hell alone and then Isaac prospers in that land just like Abraham did in Egypt until the Philistines asked him to leave he's just getting too rich and powerful things are going too well for him so he's asked to he's asked to leave now in the meantime Esau gets married Hannah this is a funny little story he says he marries two women who give grief to Isaac and Rebekah so they who every so marries they're not popular with his with their in-laws not in the least that actually becomes relevant a little later because they drive Rebekah quite mad so I get a kick out of that because that's very common you know it's not easy to integrate new people into your family and and hope that that will go smoothly it's actually one of the real catastrophes in life right you have a kid maybe you get along with them and maybe you don't but let's assume you do but then they marry someone that you just don't like and or maybe you think is wrong for them I mean that's really rough that's what are you gonna do about that you know because you're you're basically screwed both ways if you have the person you love around then you have to put up with this Prentis creature that they allied themselves with and if you if you get rid of them completely well then you know you don't have your child anymore so it's a very very difficult position and so that's another example of the realism I think of the stories now Isaac who's hypothetically on his deathbed asks Esau to hunt for venison because he likes venison and he's happy that his son is a hunter and Rebekah over here is this and so she conspires with Jacob to to slaughter two small goats and make his father some stew because he wants Esau to make him stew out of venison but Rebecca who's being I would say let's say slightly deceitful or probably lying that would be more accurate she conspires with Jacob so Jacob kills two little goats kids and boils up a stew and then he puts on some goat skins because Esau is a hairy character and and Rebecca dresses Isaac in Esau is clothing because Isaac can't see very well at this point and so then Jacob goes into his father with the stew and he's trying to disguise his voice but it doesn't work very well and so Isaac asks him to come close and Jacob puts out his arm with the goat skin on it and and Isaac smells him too and he smells like he's oh and which maybe wasn't the best thing but and feels like him and and so because Isaac thinks he's on his deathbed he decides to deliver a blessing - hypothetically - Esau and so but it's Jacob and so that's a big deal - because the blessing is actually as I said before with these ancient people it appeared as though once you said something you didn't get to take it back you couldn't say well look you've you deceived me so it doesn't count it was like they weren't maybe as as what week might be one way of thinking about it but another way is they weren't quite as attentive to context you know because if I make you a deal and then it turns out that you've betrayed me I may feel that the deal is no longer valid because the assumption was you were being honest to be giveth in that you know violates the whole spirit but that isn't how these people thought they said once he promised man you promised and that was that so Isaac blessed Jacob he says that God give you the dew of heaven and the fatness of the earth and plenty of corn and wine let let people serve you and nations bow down to you be lord over thy brethren that's gonna be rough on e so let thy mother's sons bow down to the cursed be everyone that curseth thee and blessed be he the blesseth thee and so there's a quite a remarkable painting of that so there's Rebekah she's looking pretty old and Isaac's looking pretty blind and Jacobs taking directions from his mother and we might say he's perhaps a little old to be taking moral lessons from his mother especially given how she's acting and so it's a pretty ugly scene altogether especially that we also know that Jacob already tricked Esau out of his birthright and so now he's like taking the birthright and he's taken the blessing and so as I said that Jacob he turns out to be the father of Israel it's like he's a reprehensible character these are major-league betrayals that he's engaging and it's not trivial he really really pulls the rug out from under his brother and you know you could say well Esau is not as awake as he might be you know he's kind of a wild man and fair enough but it certainly seems to me that the the predominant moral error falls on Jacobs shoulders it's very treacherous behavior what he's doing so then he saw shows up and he's got a nice stag for his dad and it's like little late for that and he states that his brother was rightly named Jacob which means supplanter because he's been deceived twice and Isaac says Isaac answered he's asking funny I was asking fundamentally if there's anything at all left over for him and Isaac can't give him the same blessing because that's already been given so he has to think of something else and Isaac says behold I've made him thy Lord and all his brothers I've given to him for servants which includes you and with corn and wine have I sustained him and what shall I now do unto thee my son and Esau said unto his father have you even one blessing for me my father and blessed me also and an e so lifted up his voice and wept and you know we already know that Esau is a pretty tough guy by all appearances and you know he's out there hunting on his own and camping and it's like he's no pushover and the fact that this reduces him to tears is an indication of the magnitude of the betrayal and Isaac says behold thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth and of the dew of heaven from above and by thy sword thou shalt live and thou shalt serve your brother and it shall come to pass when you will have the Dominion and you'll break the yoke his yoke off from thy neck and Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him and Esau said in his heart the days of mourning for my father are at hand then I will slay my Jakub so fundamentally you know if Isaac dies or when he dies then we'll mourn for him and then Jacob better look the hell out because it's like it's it's serious death coming his way and you know he's got a he's got a point he's in in Dante's Inferno I think I mentioned this at one point so Dante's Inferno it's a very interesting story it's a descent into hell and it's it's actually one of the places that we sort of derive the popular conception of Hell was partly based on Dante's on Dante's imagination on his work and what Dante was trying to do was to discover the hierarchical structure of evil and you know you might think there's a hierarchical structure of good some things are better than other things but there's also a hierarchical structure of evil some evils are greater than other evils and he put betrayal in the in the in the lowest part of health right so if you were betraying people you were right besides Satan himself and so and I think that's good that's very smart well Dante was a genius after all and I think the reason for that is that you see if someone trusts you they're laying their vulnerability open to you now they might just be naive let's say and that's we won't think about that because you're just a child if you're naive you can still be betrayed but if you're an adult and you trust it's often because you if you're an actual adult its you willingly open yourself up knowing that you could be hurt right because you're not naive anymore so you decide to trust and you see all open myself up and I know that I'm laying myself open to you if you choose to use that power and then that's a good thing to know you know if you've been hurt as a child or hurt as a naive person you might say well why should I ever trust again which is a really good question and the answer is the reason you trust again once you're an adult is because you're courageous you're courageous it's an act of courage to trust and the reason it's useful is because if you trust someone you open the door to reciprocity and negotiation and cooperation and you entice the best part of the person forward and so it's a it's a courageous act but then if you betray someone then what you've done is you've taken the best part them which is the part that will courageously trust you know with open eyes right and you've stuck a dagger in that and so you've purposefully damaged the best part of them and so that's why it's such a egregious fault and and it's often people don't recover from that sort of playing at you if you betray someone badly enough you can you can damage them like you can give them post-traumatic stress disorder if you really if you really put your mind to it and you know that's not just a psychological disorder if you have post-traumatic stress disorder it produces permanent neurological alterations that make you more neurotic more sensitive to negative emotion really for the rest of your life like you can you can recover from it to some degree but stress will tend to reinstate the PTSD so you you hurt someone and it's not merely cycled not not that psychological is merely but it's not merely psychological right it's it's fundamental physiological damage so anyways Jacobs smart enough to get out of there and which is also not really a testament to his integrity right I mean he's done these terrible things at the behest of his mother because he wants power and and he wants to get it without deserving it and then you know he finally goes too far and he hightailed it out of there to his to another family member to his mother's brother and so it's not exactly the world's most heroic story that's for sure and so now there's an interlude here and this is a really interesting interlude it's the story of Jacob's Ladder so he's off to visit Lebon or lab and who's his his mother's brother and on the way he he has asleep and he lighted upon a certain place and tarried there all night because the Sun was set and he took of the stones of that place and put them for his pillows which seems to indicate very bad planning on on his part and and lay down in that place to sleep and he dreamed and beheld a ladder set up on the earth and the top of it reached to heaven and beheld the angels of God ascending and descending on it and behold the Lord stood above it and said I am the Lord God of Abraham thy far and the guard of Isaac the land were on thou liest to thee I will give it and to thy seed and so this story of Jacob's Ladder has really possessed the imagination of the West and there's a reason for that it's because it's an archetypal story because the idea of a ladder that reaches to heaven is one of the oldest ideas of mankind so you find it widely distributed among the shamanic cultures for example and it's a hallmark of psychedelic experience that's another way of thinking about it which is a very peculiar thing so there's one representation of of the ladder you see god up at the top there peeking out from the clouds now you know that's sort of where we get the idea that God is in in heaven and then heavens up in the sky and and that's an easy story to make fun of because you know we've gone up to the moon and there's no God there and and but but this this is not a reasonable way of conceptualizing what these experiences are about these experiences what this is the opening up there that's more like an opening into an alternate dimension that's a better way of thinking about it's beyond like from from the judeo-christian perspective one of the things you have to understand is that God is beyond space and time he's not in the universe he's outside the universe in some manner and so the idea that that you have an experience of God and it's up isn't the OP is the best that the human imagination can do with what's essentially a form of extra dimensional experience or that's the best way to conceptualize it and these experiences aren't rare you know they they make the they make up the core of of the shamanic tradition and so there's an intrusion of the ancient shamanic tradition which is tens of thousands of years old into the biblical stories at this point now why Jacob had a essentially shamanic experience is very difficult to tell because we don't know what these old people were up to right and we don't know how much of the archaic tradition archaic religious tradition was still extant about at that point in time but we certainly do know that our ancient forebears were using psychedelic substances constantly like Amanita muscaria mushrooms for example which were widely used in India before they became extinct that's the theory anyways that seemed to be the basis of the chemical soma which much has been written about and so we here ever this as a dream that were as a vision and perhaps that's what it was but perhaps that wasn't what it was either and perhaps it was an experience that was induced by or by the same processes that shamanic people have always induced these experiences and so we're gonna go through this a little bit so anyways there's a there's a connection between heaven and earth that opens up that's that's that's the that's the vision and there's messengers moving up and down now one way you can conceptualize that is psychologically as we already discussed that you know there there are forces within you that are active and alive and you can think of them in some sense as messengers of the higher self and so you could think about this as an image of a psychological reality but and so we can stick with that but but here's some of the representations that have been made I really like the one on the right that's William Blake I like the helix idea and I don't think that that's that's fluke there are helixes and double helixes and all sorts of imaging imagery very ancient and very modern that are associated with both healing and with this kind of vision so and you see it in the Blake representation God is associated with well really with the Sun and with light and and you see that on the left as well that wherever God is is where light is and so that's a very interesting idea as far as I'm concerned as well there's some other representations one by Chanel so now there's this idea that there's a there's the possibility of opening up a line of communication between the human psyche and the transcendent divine and there's a there's a great image of Christ as Pam - they're so creator of the world that is one of the first mosaics if I remember correctly and I wish I knew remember where it was but I don't but it's a very interesting image I'm having a carving of it made at the moment by a friend of mine but you see Christ's face portrayed in a medieval manner and he's holding a book so it symbolizes the importance of the book you know as a means of transmitting wisdom and his face is very asymmetrical and that the eyes are different one side and the other and one half of the face represents the human part and the other side of the face represents the divine part and you know I also think about that psychologically because I do think that that's the right way to conceptualize human beings is that there's an aspect of us that's mortal and human and limited but there's an aspect of us that's transcendent and divine as well and it's latent in some sense but there are times when it manifests itself and this is not speculation right this is like the oldest experience of human beings now it's not necessarily an easy experience to have but it's reported everywhere and it can be reliably induced as we've discussed before by chemical means which and I don't know what that means exactly we've talked a little bit about psilocybin mushrooms for example and you could say that the mystical experiences that have been invoked in the newest experiments down it Johns Hopkins are arrangements or forms of psychosis you know because they have some similarity to psycho psychotic experiences although psychotic people were given LSD in the 60s and they always said that that was something different than what they were having and if you give psychotic people amphetamines you could make them worse so their bio chemically separate and we know that and but also the thing that's so interesting about the psilocybin experience is is that they reliably produce mystical experiences that the people rate as among the most important experiences of their life and among those who have the psychedelic experience positive things happen to them and so that kind of messes with the whole psychosis theory right because what are you gonna do you got a claim that you give someone a pill and they have a psychotic break and then they're healthier it's like no that isn't how psychotic breaks work you're not healthy or after having one you're like you're a broken egg and it's not easy to put you back together so and we know that people all over the world have discovered every manner of psychedelic substance that you could possibly while you imagine there's lots of hungry people wandering the earth for a long time and they eat every damn thing they could get their hands on and now and then something very peculiar happened as a consequence so so I'm gonna tell you a little bit about the shamanic tradition because it's associated with Jacob's Ladder so according to le a de murcia le odd it was a great historian of religion a comparative Jung's and and and they influenced each other quite substantially le otta believed that shamanism that used psychedelics was a degeneration from the original more pure shamanism but I think later scholarship has demonstrated that that's incorrect that that the shamanic ritual per se was a direct consequence of the use discovery of an and ritualistic use of psychedelic substances but anyways Eliana identified three pathways to shamanism and the shaman in it in a tribe was more educated than the typical person with a larger vocabulary and was the repository of the oral tradition and so learned all the stories that had been passed down word to mouth and people by the way are very very can very very accurately tell the same story across generations that's been quite well documented so and and people who can't read really can remember because what else are they going to do their memories are far greater than modern people's memories because we can forget everything because we can just look it up but they remembered things because they had no choice my father knew someone who was illiterate and and and and couldn't use numbers either when he grew up in Saskatchewan you know sixty years ago and he was a he had a sheep if I remember correctly and although he couldn't count he knew if one of his sheep was missing because he knew all the sheep and so he could tell just by looking if one of the sheep was missing but he couldn't count and so well so people who don't have our particular set of skills first of all they're not stupid and second they have other skills that we don't understand to fill in the gaps so le ah de identified spontaneous vocation so you were just you have this spirit of a shaman let's say so you're probably extremely high in openness let's say from a modern perspective hereditary transmission so you know your father was a shaman and your grandfather was a shaman and so forth and you got initiated into that process or a personal quest in Siberia this is from Ileana in Siberia the youth who is called to be a shaman attracts attention by his strange behavior for example he seeks solitude becomes absent-minded loves to roam in the woods or unfrequented places has visions and sings in his sleep you know if you put someone in a place that's deprived that's where you're you're deprived from a sensory perspective it normal people will hallucinate quite quickly so it seems what happens is that if you dampen down the sensory input then you start to become aware of the background processes of your mind it's something like that it's like the signal-to-noise ratio I got to get this right as the noise decreases some of the noise becomes signal the background noise become signal and you start to become aware of your own internal psychological process is it something like that he has visions and sings in his sleep in some instances this period of incubation is marked by quite serious symptoms among the accout young man sometimes has fits of fury and easily loses consciousness hides in the forest feeds on the bark of trees throws himself into water and fire and cuts themselves with knives we went to a part lash in northern northern Vancouver Island about a year ago and they had this one dance it was the croc Wakulla natives and they had this interesting dance that was the dance of the wild man and so the person who invited us was the wild man and he was dressed up and in tree branches and so forth and so he was the person who'd been in Bush too long and he came in as a cannibal and there there was genuine cannibalistic rights among these people not so long ago he came in as a cannibal and everybody had to wear this like cedar headdress because if you had a cedar headdress on then the cannibal wouldn't take a bite out of you and they actually took this rather seriously so you should have your cedar headdress on and so he's looking around the crowd and there's like 400 people in this place and he could really act - so he's doing this wild man dance and then all the women stood up and started to kind of dance in place and sing and they were taming him so that was really cool you know it was really interesting to see that because those people are about they've had an unbroken culture for about 13,000 years say that's how long they've been out there and it was very interesting to see that dramatization of the domestication of of man by women laid out in that dance in that way but it was also interesting in relationship to the shamanic tradition because he came in as a wild man right and he had to be re civilized in some sense and brought back down to earth so but by whatever method he may have been designated as shaman is recognized as such only after having received two methods of instruction the first is ecstatic dreams trances visions the other thing that this guy told me and I have no reason to doubt him he's also not a literate person and so has a great memory he does carving traditional carving and he's very good at it he carved a 53-foot totem pole that's now in front of the Museum of Art in downtown Montreal so if you ever go there you can go see it I won't be there forever but it's there right now and he was taught to carve by his grandparents and he said that he dreamed in you know you know what the Haida images look like so the Crocker walks are kind of like the high that same sort of imagery he told me that he dreamed in those images so when he dreams that's the form that the things he dreams about takes and he also said that he would talk to his grandparents in his dream so if he was working on a piece of wood and trying to figure out how to carve it and he ran into a particularly difficult problem he'd dream and his great he'd have a conversation with his grandparents and they'd help him figure to solve the problem and then he wake up and he could go Karva and the thing is he told me these things sort of matter-of-factly right like you don't you know what I mean it wasn't like he was telling me these weird things that happened to him although he was doing that to some degree he I asked him a lot of questions about what he carved and what it all meant and you know that was just part of his explanation of how he did it and he he carved me a couple of doors that I have in my house and one of them is quite interesting well the to make a panel and they're an underwater scene and under the water there's a bunch of you know mythical monsters some of them are killer whales and I think there's an octopus down there and carved in this particular style and he said that the other thing that happens to him when he dreams is he goes down to the bottom of the water where these mythical creatures are and he gets inspiration from them and so I thought that was extremely interesting too you know we we don't know what a mind that isn't hyper civilized let's say hyper literate like like our minds are cuz we're so bombarded by external stimuli we have no idea what the natural mind is like really and so it was quite interesting to to to listen to that and also to see the consequences cuz he's quite a great he's quite a great carver so the first is ecstatic dreams trances visions the second is traditional shamanic techniques names and functions of the spirits mythology and genealogy of the clan a secret language this twofold teaching imparted by the spirits and the old master shamans constitutes initiation well so you know modern people have a problem with that because we don't really get initiated but I would say that you know let's say that we reach out a quest of some sort you wouldn't be here I don't think if you weren't because why else would you be here and so you're on a quest of some sort to figure out to struggle with the meaning of life let's say and you don't want to do that alone because you only last like 70 years and good luck figuring it out on your on your own it's just not gonna happen it's too complicated and you'll be too isolated right if it's just you that's insanity that's no one can stand that and so you hope that other people have things to tell you and that your culture has something to tell you you know so you're on a quest maybe not with the same intensity as a shamanic initiate but you know let's give you some credit and then you're also trying to understand the wisdom of the past and that's the second part of this it's like okay well you're a human being and human beings have been telling stories for a long period of time trying to figure out what's going on trying to figure out how to orient themselves in the world and so you know partly what you're doing here is exactly what the shamanic initiatives in the second part of the process which is to expose yourself to the degree that you can - names and functions of the spirits mythology and genealogy of the clan and the secret language this twofold teaching imparted by the spirits and the old master shamans constitutes initiation so it's that's the rebirth right yeah that's that's what a nation is it's being born again and and that's a birth of the spirit rather than over the body it's something like that and so it's the rebirth of an integrated psyche that's one way of thinking about it and a psyche that's that's individual but also grounded in common humanity and the wisdom of common humanity and that makes you strong or at least it makes you stronger because there's a limit to your strength but God Only Knows to some degree what that limit is you know people can be unbelievably tough unbelievably tough and I think it's even the more admirable for human beings to be tough because we're so conscious of how we can be hurt and we're so conscious of what that hurt can lead to you know you can have your family taken away from you and you can be destroyed and the fact that you can be courageous in the face of that at all is something that is absolutely unbelievable right and people deserve a lot more credit I think then people give themselves because the fact that we can be honorable under conditions of life and death right of suffering that's that's a testament to the human spirit and there's a profound anti human ethos I think that pervades our culture you know that considers human beings cancers on the planet something like that you know and that there should be less of us it's the same spirit that motivated the guy who wrote the book about it better to have never been it's like I don't see it that way you know I mean I think people do pretty well for you know for having their leg caught in a bear trap and their head caught in a vise they're actually doing pretty well because life is really hard and the fact that we're not absolutely brutal and murderous all the time is really something remarkable given what we actually have to contend with that we can go out of our way to be honest and generous and altruistic and to care for each other under unbelievably dire circumstances and to act nobly sometimes under the most trying conditions you know in Solzhenitsyn's Gulag Archipelago he tells story after story of people who acted abysmally but also people who under the worst threats imaginable never sacrificed their character you know in reading about that is really well it really makes you wonder that's that's what it does the future shamans among the Tungus as they approach maturity go through a hysterical or a history would crisis but sometimes their vocation manifests itself at an earlier age the boy runs away into the mountains and remains there for a week or more feeding on animals which he tears to pieces with his teeth he returns to the village filthy blood-stained and it's only after 10 or more days that have passed that he begins to babble incoherent words the strange behavior of future shamans has not failed to attract the attention of scholars and from the middle of the past century several attempts have been made to explain the phenomena as a mental disorder but the problem was wrongly put from the one hand it is not true that shamans always are always have to be neuropathic in mentally deranged on the other hand and this is the critical issue those among them who had been ill become shamans precisely because they had succeeded in becoming cured so it was it's not the descent into this strange subterranean psychological state that constitutes the transformation that makes the shaman but it's the emergence back out of it and that's a journey to the underworld in a and a rebirth right and so and there's this great book this is a great book by a guy named Henry Ellen birch a and he was an existential psychoanalyst and philosopher and he wrote a book called the Discoverer of the unconscious which I would highly recommend it's on my list of recommended readings it is a great book if you want to know about the psychoanalytic tradition it's the best introduction there is and he discusses Adler and Jung and Freud and there's a very credible job of all three but also takes the history of psychoanalytic thought back three or four hundred years before Freud and so it's it's very engaging reading and and and and very interesting and one of the things alan burridge a points out quite clearly is and he associates this to some degree with this shamanic tradition that both Freud and Jung Jung in particular underwent very intense periods of psychological disturbance let's say and I would say what was happening is that because they were questioning their axioms at the most fundamental level they were deranging their cognitive and perceptual structures right and Jung was also experimenting with imaginative techniques with visionary techniques which he which he did a lot and there is a period of his life where he was having constant a constant stream of visions which he wrote down in a book called the red book but at the same time he was still functioning as a psychiatrist and operating normally in the world and so you know people have suggested that what he had was a psychotic break but that's ridiculous because you don't know that's not how it works man if you're having a psychotic break you you know I've been an effective psychiatrist those things do not go together especially not for a long period of time and so there there's the possibility of extreme experience without psycho psychopathology and so and Allen Burgess he says much the same thing about Freud and about Charles Darwin as well who underwent a terrible period of of mental confusion I would say as a consequence of formulating his theory of evolution which was really hard on him because he was a he was a die-hard Christian and he knew what he knew what the implications of his theory word he didn't know what to do about that you know so it was very very hard on him so it's quite common for people of genius to go through an intense crisis psychological crisis but then resolve it and the genius is in the resolution right the precondition for the genius is the dissolution in some sense because you have to be obsessed with the problem it has to grip you completely before you're going to concentrate it on it's so obsessively that you might come up with a solution but it's the people who come up with a solution that are the prophets in the shaman and so forth and so on and and and so that's not this isn't something that only characterizes archaic cultures we just don't recognize it in our own culture properly and and that's a problem well sometimes we do right you remember that in the Lion King right that Rafiki shows up he's the shaman he brings he brings Simba down that tunnel dark tunnel that's the dark night of the soul he has him reflect upon himself in a pool when he reflects upon himself deeply he sees the reflection of his father then that becomes a car thing of cosmic significance and his father appears in the sky just like God appears to jacob and basically tells them that it's time for him to grow the hell up and to return to the devastated kingdom and to set it right you know and so and that's right that's exactly right I mean we live in the devastated Kingdom that's an eternal truth and it's the responsibility of the individual to grow the hell up and to set it right because when it's devastated and when things are not in place then everyone suffers too much and that's not good and there's no excuse for not doing something about it because you don't have anything better to do so and even like children's movies tell you this so this is a fun one this is from the Eid wine Psalter 9th to 12th century and that's Adam and Eve but the there is speculation that the fruit that they're eating there you see it is psilocybin mushrooms right because they're the only kind of mushroom that grow like that so that's pretty wild you might say and then this is the I think it's called Bannister realign if I remember correctly and it's what ayahuasca is made out of and it has this double helix form which is very very interesting and they the people the natives nobody could figure out how the hell they made this ayahuasca we which transports people spiritually in a very intense manner and there's a whole religion based on it like a modern religion as well as the archaic religion and to make this stuff they had to take two plants that don't grow anywhere near each other and like there's like a million plants in the Amazon so like how do you figure that out nobody knows and then you have to cook them in this very particular way for a particular amount of time before you produce this stuff so one of the plants has DMT in it which is a very intense psychedelic but it's very short acting and the other has an MAO inhibitor so if you take the DMT and you take the MAO inhibitor then the DMT trip lasts for much longer and so that's what these Amazonian natives figured out and no one has any idea how they managed it and if you ask them they tell you that the plants told them how to do it which isn't much of an explanation as far as modern people are concerned but then when modern people take the ayahuasca and the plant so to speak starts to talk to them there are a little less leery of the whole theory that the plants had something to do with this so you know and these things that these I'm loathe to talk about this because I'm not an advocate for drug use but by the same token you can't ignore empirical data it's not reasonable and the empirical data that psychedelic substances can produce mystical experiences and that those often have a transformative effect I mean one of the latest studies showed that if you took people who are dying of cancer and you and you gave them psilocybin in a sufficient dose to produce a mystical experience that you radically it decreased their their fear of death it's like you go to think about that man that's that's tough that's a tough experiment you you just wouldn't expect that that you think you take someone you'd arranged them intensely and then when they come back they're not even though they're dying they're not nearly as afraid of dying you know you got to kind of wake up and smell the roses when you see something like that and the people who are doing this research are very reliable people so there's the Amanita muscaria you know there's this old idea it's quite a funny idea toadstools so flies like Amanita muscaria and there's some this is ridiculous there's some evidence that they actually like getting stoned so cuz animals will eat these like reindeer will eat these things too and they get pretty tripped out by them and so I have this book on psychedelic use among animals which is a small book but and so so there's there's this idea that toads used to sit around the they have any NamUs carry and wait for the stone flies to like buzz badly around them and then snap them up so that's pretty funny I think and so and you know there are mushrooms in in the u.s. that are the oldest the oldest organisms on the planet a there's one mushroom I can't remember where it is but it covers something like oh god I don't know like square hundreds of square miles it's like this huge thing because it's all underground right and they have these very complex networks of my Celia they're called and they think the thing is like a hundred and fifty thousand years old something like that so there's plenty of things about the world that we don't know that's for sure there's the chemical makeup of the classic psychedelics you see they all have the same fundamental structure this is serotonin that's the one of the major brain neurotransmitters and so what happens with the psychedelics is that they they alter the they alter the brain function by altering the neuro chemical utilization of serotonin they changed the manner in which the serotonergic systems worked and the serotonin system is very basic system because when you're an embryo and your brain is developing it's the serotonin projections that basically orchestrate the development of your brain so they're and they're very archaic circuits very very archaic circuits so and this is the paper I think I stole this from psilocybin Griffiths who's been doing a lot of this research psilocybin can occasion mystical type experiences having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance so why that's a good question right like so so here's a question for you it is beyond dispute that human beings are capable of religious experience why why is that exactly and like you can associate it with psychosis but that doesn't work if the theory doesn't hold theory hold water it's not the same thing so why is it there exactly and it's not an easy thing to figure out like I've been trying to figure I'm always trying to figure out a biological explanation for everything right because if you want to find something to stand on you want to make sure that it can resist a challenge and so if I can find an explanation for something that's reductionistic and materialistic and biological then I'm going for that that's a tough one consciousness is a tough one the moral sense is a tough one they're not easy things to crack the Big Bang is a tough one so you know I mean a cynic might say that maybe sometimes when people are close to suicide they'll have a mystical experience you know and you maybe you say well it's a last-ditch attempt of your brain to delude you into thinking that your life has some significance you know and that's a plausible theory but I don't think it counts for the generality of the phenomena so so I don't buy it what happens in the shamanic experience is that the shaman has the experience of being reduced to a skeleton first so death a deaf experience very realistic death experience and then the next thing that happens is that he finds himself in a place where he's communing with his ancestor or the ancestral spirits and then after that there's the climbing of something like the ladder Jacob's Ladder se and an encounter with God for all intents and purposes and it's very widespread phenomena it's the World Tree and I've thought about this a lot trying to figure out what this what this represents according to a yeah coot informant that's in Siberia the spirits carry the future shaman to hell and shut him in a house for three years here he undergoes his initiation the spirits cut off his head which they set off to one side for the novice must watch his own dismemberment with his own eyes dissolution to the primary elements in some and hack his body to bits which are later distributed among the spirits of various sicknesses it's only on this condition that the future shaman will obtain the power of healing his bones are then covered with new flesh and in some case he is also given new blood so there's a death and resurrection experience that's associated with the shamanic ritual we're here in the presence of a very ancient religious idea which belongs to the hunter culture bone symbolizes the final route of animal life the mould from which the flesh continually rises it is from the bone that men and animals are reborn for a time they maintain themselves in an existence of the flesh then they die and their life is reduced to the essence concentrated in the skeleton from which they will be born again that's a good graphic representation of the experience that's an old painting by I think it's her own amis Bosch if I remember correctly and I really like that because it's it's reminiscent of the near-death experiences that you hear people describe and they're quite common as well and and I had that very weird experience once I don't think I've told you this story I was I was assessing someone who had gone through a car windshield and he was very depressed it had happened a long time before but he was very depressed and the insurance company was basically accusing him of malingering because he'd been depressed for so long and you know he'd sort of healed up and everything but if your left hemisphere is damaged especially the frontal part of your left hemisphere then you can be in a chronic state of depression because the left hemisphere generally speaking is responsible for positive emotion and so if it isn't there then it's like negative emotion for you and so I wouldn't assess him and I was giving him this I think it was called the MMPI the Minnesota multiphasic personality inventory which is a kind of a standard path personality test half psychopathology test and he was filling it out he was a very serious guy middle-aged guy nothing about him was new agey in the least he was like an accountant I think I think in fact he was an accountant if I remember correctly and there was one question and it said my spirit has left my I think that's right it's very close and he stopped and he asked me well he said I'm not sure how to answer this and so I said well why and he said well after I went through the car windshield I was in a coma for three weeks something like that and I died I think he said he died three times and he said that he could remember he couldn't remember anything during that period of time and he couldn't remember the car accident that's retrograde amnesia it's quite corn common with head injuries and he said that during one of those experiences and this is all he remembered from the hospital was that he came out of his body and went down the long tunnel of light you've heard these near-death experiences and then saw his family members there and saw the heavenly light and then realized that it wasn't his time and came back to his body now what was interesting about this guy was that well first of all I didn't ask him about this right he basically volunteered this story and it was instigated by this question and and he didn't know that anybody else at any ever had an experience like that cuz I asked him if he'd ever heard anything about like that he said no so that was interesting but what really was interesting is how the hell did he remember that right because he had amnesia during that entire period of time he was in a bloody coma so he didn't remember anything they remembered that and so well those experiences are more common than you think and then there's a you know there's a painting of one which is quite interesting and that's like a tunnel to heaven it's the same basic idea it's a little bit more suffering going on in this one I think but that's pretty much typical of Hieronymous Bosch I mean I don't know what was up with that guy but he was he was one strange character now the Scandinavians have this idea that the world is a tree and I've been thinking about that a lot I think that the tree idea tree is something that is grounded in in matter let's say and that reaches up to heaven in the Scandinavian tree at the bottom there's quite a cool idea at the bottom of that see this tree is constantly being gnawed by snakes you can sort of see the snakes at the bottom and at the same time it's being watered and the water makes the tree grow at the same rate that the snakes gnaw on its roots so it's like a yin-yang idea you know that there's continual chaotic destruction and replacement at the basis of whatever this process is but the tree seems to me to be a representation not so much of its it's like a different dimensional space that's that's what's trying to be represented so imagine that you know you're structured if you take powers of ten magnification say human beings are about in the middle of the tiniest thing and the largest thing if you do it by my powers of 10 and so you know you have a subatomic level in an atomic level a molecular level and you know then that may be a level of organs and then there's you and then there's your family and so on all the way up the the tree fundamentally and so I think that what this tree represents and this is the things that thing that the shaman moves up and down I think that's what it represents it's this it's this different view of of its dimensionality it's something like that and I think that what happens in the psychedelic experience is that consciousness can travel up and down that structure it's something like that and maybe not only up and down it but maybe right through it and I know that's a radical claim it's a really radical claim and it might be wrong but it's probably wrong even because most radical claims are wrong but but but I'm not so sure it's wrong and here's something cool so that's the Scandinavian world tree and that was drawn by an anthropologist who visited the tribes in the Amazon who use ayahuasca now you see it's a snake it's a tree with snakes well you know that's reminiscent of the story in Adam and Eve obviously but it's also reminiscent of our primate dwelling place right because that was basically our ancestral home a tree surrounded by snakes and the snakes like to eat us and this is a long time ago this is like 50 million years ago it's really a long time ago and so we don't know where these images come from precisely but I do have the suspicion that we use the circuitry that we developed to detect snakes to represent the unknown as such because like a snake is something that comes out of the unknown and like we evolved right we all evolved out of an animal sub structure and so we had to get our our biological cognitive structure from somewhere and we have this capacity of thinking about the absolute unknown and the terrors that are involved in that that the horrors that can emerge from what we don't understand and it stands perfectly to reason that we would use circuits that were already pre developed for that and that this is a reasonable representation of the existential structure of the world so I think I might have showed you this before but it never ceases to amaze me this this picture so my son drew this when he was nine eight and so on the right you see mushroom houses and they have the names of all his friends on them and so that's order right and then on the left side you see chaos there and that little orange thing is a bug and then there's a river that runs right down the middle and so that's like the you know the yin-yang symbol with the divide in the middle that's quite cool and then there's there it is there's Jacob's Ladder it's like Jack and the Beanstalk which is by the way another variant of the same shamanic story and there are bugs going up and down it they're taking messages from heaven and then up there in heaven it's got the Sun and there's st. Peter and I don't know where in the world he got this it's not like he had a lot of religious education I mean despite me and you know there's the pearly gates up there and then that was the world as far as his he had a very well ordered psyche I would say and and still does but when he drew that it just absolutely blew me away and so I had it laminated and it's in my office because well I don't know because like what the hell do you make of that you know that's that's why so well you sort of get the picture there you know the cathedrals the great cathedrals of Europe are there like the forests in stone right and they try to represent the light coming through the leaves and so it's sort of our ancestral forest home but it's it's transformed into these great sculptures of stone and you know they produce all because of the combination of light and darkness and color but also I think for the same reason that huge trees produce awe and people you know and we don't want them cut down they seem sacred in some sense and perhaps they are but you know it also seemed to me this is an intuition that the the architects of these great cathedrals were trying to get they're trying to express something that's deep and structural they're trying time trying to express the idea that if being was constituted properly then it would be organized from the subatomic level all the way up to the highest cosmic level perfectly so every layer stacked on top of each other without any contradictions now that would be an ideal mode of being and everything would come together under those circumstances and that's what's being expressed in these cathedrals it's not all that's being expressed because they're also shaped like a cross and you know the idea is that the center of the cross which is the center of suffering is also the place of the individual the place where the transformation takes place that's all built into the architect as well and so then there's the tree like structures that make us up it stretched down to the tiniest realities the microcosm and there's this this idea it's all represented in the same way again it's this idea especially the Mandela up in the top-right it's the idea of is perfection of crystalline structure and that's what the Yogi's are trying to attain when they organize their bodies they're trying to get every single layer of their being aligned properly and it's something like and you can kind of see an echo of that in the I think that's a Tibetan sand painting if I remember correctly left the idea is that if you get yourself a line properly then information can flow along that tree that that's you without without impediment something like that and that would be like a state of optimal health and that both physical and spiritual exercises can put you in that state and that's well those are all clouds of ideas that surround this idea of a ladder to heaven so Jacob is talking to God and God says behold I am with thee and I will keep thee in all places where you go and bring you again into this land for I won't leave you until I have done that which I have spoken to you of and Jacob awakened out of his sleep and he said surely the Lord is in this place and I knew it not and he was afraid and said how dreadful is this place this is none other but the house of God and this is the gate of heaven when Jacob rose up early in the morning and took the stone that he had put for his pillows and set it up for a pillar and poured oil on top of it that's a sacrifice and he called the name of that place Bethel but the name of the city was called l-'izzat the first and Jacob vowed a vow saying if God will be with me and will keep me in this way that I go and will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on so that I come again to my father's house in peace then shall the Lord be my god and this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be God's house and of all of that that is given to me I will surely give the tenth unto thee and that's a pretty good place to stop so now I'll just conclude so you have this very morally ambivalent character right who's so far pretty much everything he's done that we're familiar with is not good so he's he's betrayed his brother horribly twice badly enough so that he his brother wants to kill him and everyone can kind of sympathize with his brother so and then he runs away essentially because his mother tells him to which is not exactly a testament to his character and despite that strangely enough he has this experience you know and that's heartening I guess and that's the point is that people are predisposed to terrible error there's no doubt about that and yet when I was writing my latest book I had a friend of mine Norman Doidge wrote the foreword and Norma's written a couple of great books and he's Jewish and he read some of what I'd written and he took me to task for making the god of the Old Testament you know from a Christian perspective too harsh and unforgiving and I rewrote a fair bit of it because of his criticism and because of what I've learned doing these lectures it's like it's not exactly right you know I mean what happens in the Old Testament is if you screw up especially if you know you do and you decide that you're not going to do anything about it so it's conscious and deliberate then like look the hell out you are in serious trouble and I actually think that's also psychologically accurate one of the things young pointed out and this always struck me was that if you don't know what you're doing this is actually in the Gospel of Thomas as well interestingly enough as one of the caustic Gospels Christ tells his followers something like if you make a mistake and you don't know what you're doing then you'll be forgiven for it but if you make a mistake knowing what you're doing and you do it anyways then like good luck to you and and and I think that's I think that's that's psychologically accurate I mean one of the things that's very interesting about the judgmental God in the Old Testament however is that he can be bargained with and even if you make mistakes especially if you're unconscious of them if you haven't learned yet let's say then you always have the opportunity to return to the proper path and that's people get cynical about that because there's no this mostly Christian idea that you could live a terribly sinful life but if you repented on your deathbed it's like heaven for you and it's like oh that's that sounds like a great deal right it's like you can do whatever the hell you want until just before you die of course you might not know when that is so that's a problem you then you can just say well I'm sorry and you know everything's forgiven but the problem with being cynical about that sort of thing is that it's no trivial matter to repent you know because to repent means a figure out what you actually did and the worst things that you did the more horrible it is to figure it out it's no joke right and there's no genuine repentance without understanding of the depth of your depravity and so if you lived a particularly reprehensible life and you come to understand it I think that in and of itself could kill you you know it's a terrible thing to wake up and see what you've done if what you've done is truly terrible so there's no easy out it's not an easy out it's it's just pure cynicism to associate that idea with with an easy oh it's not but there is that positive idea that it's continually represented is that the individual is the source of moral choice and the individual is prone to genuine error and temptation in a believable and realistic way but that that doesn't sever the relationship between the individual and the divine and the possibility of further growth and then I would say well thank God for that because without that like who would have a chance right who would have a chance and so the idea that the daddy has presented the infinite let's say as presented in the Old Testament is merely judgmental is definitely wrong and and is in fact something that you can contend with and Argan with oh I'll close with one thing one of the things that I learned that while I was going through this was the meaning of the name Israel because Jacob eventually gets named Israel and and I'm jumping ahead a little bit to the next lecture but Israel and so he's also the father of Israel and the father of the twelve sons who make up the twelve tribes of Israel but what Israel means is he who struggles with God and that's such an interesting idea because it's again a psychological idea and that's why I said earlier that it isn't obvious in the Old Testament what it means to believe in God because what Jacob does is struggle with God and I think that that's a really good characterization of an ethical life because if you're trying to lead an ethical life that's what you're doing is you're struggling like blind belief isn't helpful because you don't know what you're believing in like it's just not that helpful but if you're possessed by by the desire to orient yourself properly but also confused by the by the existential structure of the world which we all are then then what you're doing when you're trying to orient yourself properly in life is struggling ethically and Jacob actually gets quite hurt he wrestles with God literally and God dislocates his his his thigh and so you know the idea there is watch the hell out right the thing that you're contending with is powerful although you can contend with it that's the thing that's so interesting but you know you do it at some genuine peril which i think is exactly right but the idea that Israel so there's Israel the state let's say it Israel the promised land and all of that but there's this more important idea which is again a psychological idea which is the State of Israel which is the promised land is the state that everyone who wrestles with God exists in and that's not happy naive belief in you know an eternally blessed afterlife it's not that it's not a wish fulfillment it's it's it's to be actively engaged in life in the difficulties of life right and trying to find the path because that's what wrestling with God is is trying to find the path and that seems to me what belief means fundamentally in the Old Testament perhaps in the New Testament as well is that belief is expressed in trying to find the path and that's an ethical struggle and it's a real struggle it's the struggle of life so as long as you're willing to engage in that struggle then hypothetically you have the divine behind you and so I believe that I think that's true because the other thing I see is that the people who set things right so that yeah the the horrible forces of cosmic destruction don't do us in the people who are trying to set things right are the ones that are struggling ethically and so and that there is a redemptive element to that and I don't think there's any way of being cynical about that so well so thank you will so remember to speak right into the mic because there are all these other people watching that will hear it will hear us so okay hi dr. Peterson so with the story of Jacob today there was a theme of betrayal and you can see that from the beginning because he was very angry and jealous at his brother I was thinking are there new stories or we can say about betrayal that does come from a loved one right where it's not from a place of so black and white of anger resentment and bitter and how do the parties kind of recover from that or is there any way to redeem that or is it as black and white as if you betray someone then there it's like Jacob where hatred no and in fact in this story it's not black and white because we know we're only halfway through it and one of the things I've noticed as a clinician let's say is that and as an observer of people in general is that I've never ever seen anyone get away with anything and Jacob doesn't get away with any of this and so you know he's humbled by his eventual experiences and he learns that he did it wrong and there's reconciliation that happens throughout the story of Jacob so and there's minor betrayals and major betrayals you know that some of them have tremendously serious consequences and some of them have lesser consequences but there is an underlying idea that things can still be set right even though it's well I think it takes Jacob some 20 years something like that to set things right and even then it's like touch and go so if I answer your question okay yeah hey you speak frequently in your lectures about I guess the war between good and evil or the struggle of life really is a struggle between good and evil being at the core of a conscious lived existence and I guess on that note if you were 100% certain that there was no afterlife would you still be able to preach that there's a positive meaning in life if you were a hundred percent certain some atheists seem to be 100 percent certain and yet they still preach that there's some positive meaning to life would you be one of those or would you turn into Cain you know so cynical I think that well as far as I'm concerned one of the things I learned from studying 20th century history is that like even if the idea that even if you take the most cynical of ideas let's say that life is irredeemable suffering and and perhaps isn't even justified because of that it still seems to me that you have an ethical duty let's say to live in a manner that reduces that to the degree part that that's possible and so and I think that that can be experienced as meaningful in some sense independently of the transcendent context now I don't exactly know how to strip off the transcendent context because one of the things I would say that's happened to me is because I've spent so much time looking at the horrible things that people have done is that it's like Jung said that he when this is one of his famous quotes he said no tree can reach up to heaven unless its roots reach down to hell and so as I've dug deeper into the depravity of human beings my sense of the possibility of human beings has also grown what would you say in proportion and until I've become convinced actually that good is a more powerful force than evil even though evil is an unbelievably powerful force and so I can't really strip the transcendent away now whether what bearing that has on eternity say on an afterlife i mean i i i I can't say anything about that the only thing I guess I can say is that there are many things about being that we don't understand in the least and we don't understand the nature of consciousness or the nature of time so I I'm not I wouldn't despair about that but yes I think that life can still be meaningful without without there being a necessity of an afterlife no no no no hi dr. Pederson so since studying your work one of the things that I found most fascinating is your analysis of the story of Cain and Abel and my question is if if Cain got to the point that he did right before killing his brother murdering his ideal and decided that that was something he didn't want to do what advice or guidance would you would you give a person that got to that point well there's a story I read called the cocktail party I've mentioned this before by TS Eliot and in the cocktail party there's a scene it's a play where this woman approaches a psychiatrist and and starts talking to him about her problems and she says something that surprises him she says I hope that I'm the problem he says well why would you hope that and she says well I thought about it a lot and if the world is the problem then I'm done because I can't change the world but if I'm the problem then maybe there's something about myself I can change and I can undo this terrible situation that I'm in and so I would say that's repentance fundamentally it's like there if and I say this carefully because I understand that people are susceptible to bad fortune sin and ignorance can make that worse but independently of that like good people suffer make no mistake about it but if things aren't right for you if you're resentful about being because that's the right way of because that's the deepest way of thinking about if you read the writings of the people who do the mass killings for example that's what you see over and over it's cain it's like they're angry beyond comprehension at the in tolerability of being and they're angry at God even if they don't say it exactly like that they come so close to saying it like that that it's there's no difference you know what God says to Cain is look to yourself first before you criticize being and that strikes me as right it's because to not do that is arrogant beyond belief that's satanic arrogance literally if something like that can be literal it's like don't make yourself the judge of being before you clean up your your room let's say and because the other thing to it this is something I learned in some part from Solzhenitsyn when he was in the prison camps and trying to understand how these heroic people he saw could possibly manage it one of the exercises he undertook and he really viewed this within a Christian Orthodox context of repentance and redemption is he said he went over his life with a fine-tooth comb and tried to imagine all of the ethical mistakes he made in his entire life that he knew were mistakes it was it was this was the soul searched not he wasn't relying on external standards of morality except insofar as we're inevitably influenced by those and then his idea was is there something I could do right now to put that right and that's the right question like if things aren't going your way and I think that means that you're resentful and arrogant and deceitful those are the three things that clump together I think that constitute the core of evil it's something like that and so if you're possessed by that which is a hell then its repentance that's the right answer and what that means is you have to figure out what you did wrong and you have to pay for it and then at least you could think well look I can try that with all of my soul let's say and see what happens right it can at least be an experiment and then I would also say that that's an act of faith it's an act of faith to conduct that experiment because you put yourself on the line right and that's what an active faith is you don't know the outcome but you don't know the outcome of your life so live in some sense is an act of faith you're putting faith in something that that's why you're moving forward you couldn't move forward without an act of faith you know and people say well I own move forward on the basis of the facts it's like yeah but you select the facts and there's an infinity of facts and they don't just tell you what to do so it's not a credible answer so if you're in that situation it's like look to yourself you know and one of the things about Solzhenitsyn that's so bloody amazing is that's what he did and then he wrote the Gulag Archipelago and you know he took an axe to the intellectual and moral substructure of of the totalitarian communist states so while he was redeeming himself let's say he was simultaneously redeeming the world and you know you see something like that like you you gotta wake up man that's that was really something so yeah dr. Peterson I have a lot of questions that arise from your comments at the Bell for one hundred event your m103 video your recent discussion with ayaan Hirsi Ali and your comments on Islam in the West in general and in your comments there's this common theme that one of these things is not like the other you put the judeo-christian tradition on the one side and Islam on the other specifically the quote complex problem of Islam in the quote as a quote totalizing system and before I go further let me state that if hypothetically a final analysis of Islam resulted in as total of denunciation as your analysis of post-modernism or near Marxism I wouldn't be personally offended at all this isn't a a personal question in your recent interview with ayaan Hirsi Ali she said Western values are superior to Islamic law and Islamic values I agree with that basically certainly in the context of let's say current global affairs I'll skip the quotes from a recent magazine interview but you should read them because hers is a worldview which is very much the West versus Islam not radical Islam but Islam including necessarily the military option so my question is at the level of psychological significance of these stories at the level of mythology and archetype how is Islam so different from the Jo Christian tradition you know because Adam Adam Eve of Shaitaan Shaitaan so on and so forth everything from the fault of the flood a lot of what you've discussed in this lecture series is necessarily part of Islam as well and in fact I think one of the strongest criticism of Islam that it's perhaps pretty unoriginal you know tonight you said that the moral presuppositions of a culture are instantiated in its stories I see a lot of the same stories so current global affairs aside I'm asking at the deepest levels how different are these stories in the morals presuppositions ok well that's that's a killer question well ok so the first thing I would say is fundamentally I don't know and so part of the reason that I'm one of the things I'm planning to do is to have a series of discussions and plenty of people have contacted me about discussing with ayaan Hirsi Ali as you know she has powerful and serious folks and they're not happy with her black and white distinction and so now I read infidel and I really liked that book like I my sense was that she she was a heroine now what that means in relationship to Islam that's a different story because she came out of a like a totalitarian let's say family structure in a relatively totalitarian society and you could make the case that there's a correspondence between that and his lemon you could make the case that there isn't and and of course that's the critical issue and so there's a couple of things that I can't wrap my head around with we have wrap my head around easily in relationship to Islam and so one is what I see as the failure to separate church from state and that's a problem now it may not be a problem as such but it's certainly a problem in relationship to the relation between Islam and the West because we separate church from state now there's fundamentalists in the United States Christian fundamentalists who think that that separation is a mistake so it's not only it's not only an idea that's rooted in Islam that those should be United but it's definitely a problem with regards to our coexistence because that's a fundamentally different presumption okay so that's problem number one problem number two for me and again this may be a consequence of my ignorance which I'm trying to rectify Muhammad was a warlord and I I don't know what to do about that fact like one thing you can say about Christ hypothetically let's say I'm not talking about a historical reality necessarily although I'm not denying it either is that of all the things he was warlord was definitely not one of them and I don't know what to do about that and so I don't know how to reconcile that and I don't know how to reconcile like not only was Muhammad a warlord which I don't think is an unreasonable thing to proclaim the expansion that he initiated was unbelievably successful I mean within six hundred years it was the biggest empire of the world had ever seen and a demolished Byzantine Christianity which is something that Western people don't even know you know I've read thinkers who said that the West was so traumatized culturally let's say by the demolition of Byzantine Christianity that we can't even study it now and so I don't know if that's true but I don't know that it's not true either and the Buddhists were wiped out of Afghanistan and we saw that echoed in talibans destruction of those great Buddhist monuments and so so what I'm hoping is that there's a bridge there better be a bridge and that's why I want to have these discussions because I'd like to understand if there's a bridge and so lots of people have sent me people who I should talk to who who they think represent Islam far better than ayaan Hirsi Ali and perhaps they're correct and hopefully I'll get an opportunity to talk to them because I would like to know why I would like to know if what I think is wrong because if it's wrong it's important that I know it's wrong but at the moment I don't a I don't know it's wrong and B I don't see I'm not sure what it signifies so and I don't think anyone is sure right because we have this entangled entangling of the civilizations you know when there's other things too like I'm not very happy with the Saudi Arabs and the Wahabis I don't think they're our allies I don't see how any Western woman can possibly think that they're our allies and I'm not happy with the fact that the petrol dollars that we send them are transformed in substantial part into the kind of propaganda that's definitely a threat to the West and I'm not very happy with the fact that our politicians appear stupidly blind to that now that may again be a consequence of my ignorance it's certainly possible but those are the sorts of things that that I can't reconcile and so you know I've seen that I've also seen parallels between the ideas that I'm presenting here and other religious traditions Taoism and Buddhism Hinduism it's harder for me to bridge the gap with Islam and I'm not sure why that is I think it has something to do with the things that I just laid out now what I don't know about Islam would feel very many volumes many of which I have sitting on my shelves at home right now because I want to do the reading you know as I progress through this but good evening dr. Pearson thanks for continuing this series even as atheists appreciate the interaction and the the conversation I wanted to ask you something that is both emotional and analytical because oftentimes you're basically pegged as seeing things very analytically so you were talking earlier about you were talking about the the the juxtaposition between happiness and honor even though I don't think they're mutually exclusive personally but if there's a situation let's say where someone is truly in love with someone else and they love them for many years and decades they have a whole history together and then someone and then one of the people in this grouping start falling in love with someone else so it's not that there's less love for the original partner how analytically and emotionally do you take care of a situation like that when you feel that you want to stay honorable and be happy okay so the first thing I would say is the devil is always in the details right so one of the things that I'm not happy about with much modern moral theorizing is that it takes a story like that you know and then tries to extract out a general moral principle and often that's impossible because the particulars of the situation are very important but having said that all right so let me think about that for a minute I'm not sure that it's possible to be honorable in a situation like that because I think that you've acted out the violation already and having acted out the violation to confess it might be the right thing to do although perhaps not you know because if you it isn't obvious to me that if you betray someone then you get to have the right to tell them about it I know I know you're not yeah yeah I understand I understand my observation has been that if there's a tight relationship and if one party is betrayed by the other in that matter that it's almost always irreconcilable it breaks it and you know I've helped people try to struggle through that but on both sides of it the person who was betrayed and the person who did the betrayal I've seen people grow up and not do it again and this was in situations where their partner didn't know and in a couple of those situations it seemed to me that it might have even been a necessary learning experience for the person who did it you know it it helped them develop and that doesn't mean I'm justifying it but life is complicated but but I think that society works better all things considered when you make a promise and you stick to it and one of the things I learned from reading young which which I really liked was you know he believed that and he had his affairs too so you might think about it as somewhat hypocritical but but I think that people can make mistakes without having what they think necessarily be wrong you know he said that there are things in a marriage that you can't have unless you're all-in and I believe that I believe that and so if there's a back door open or though like to begin with or a back door opens then I think that there's something about the relationship that is lacking at least and I think you pay a big price for that so I mean it depends on whether you regard a marriage as a practical arrangement or a spiritual arrangement now really it's both you know and both are important but if it's a spiritual arrangement or a psychological arrangement above all then I do think that you don't get the transformation without being all-in and if you violate it then even if you can work it out with your partner there's something that you will never get as a consequence so last question okay I hope I'll make this good thanks also for a continuing the lecture series I haven't listened to all of the lectures but it seems like you focus very much on the appeal of the bible of stories to the individual psychology you have any thoughts on the relative importance of crowd psychology to the appeal and staying power of the bible and also the the reason why the Bible or the biblical stories took precedence over other ideologies which could have taken its place okay well let's go to the second one first I think it's the same thing that happens when someone both creates and edits a great movie it's no one knows like imagine how many choices are there in a great movie let's say it's an animated movie because absolutely everything in an animated movie is constructed everything there's God only knows how many choices like maybe there's millions of choices you know and each choice is guided by some intuition of narrative suitability or beauty or there's some higher ideal motivating it right the desire to produce a masterpiece maybe that's it that was certainly the case with the Disney movies for example and so that that aspiration then then makes the decisions and so I would say well something like that guided the writing and the selection of the stories in in the biblical canon now could have there been other stories included well the Catholics and the Protestants don't have the same biblical tradition and neither do the Jews and the Christians and so it isn't exactly clear what to make of that you know I mean that's akin in some sense to the discussion we just had about Islam and Christianity in some sense I've left that aside that specific question except insofar as I've just answered because I'm trying to take what we have which I know is that their route of our culture and to figure out what it is that we have why it is that we have it well I've made some attempt to explain that in the manner that I just described but I don't have a final answer I could it have been different it could have been different at some levels but the same at others you know I mean one of the things it's the scholars of comparative religion who haven't been infected fatally with post-modernism have definitely realized so young for example in Le ah de people who are interested in grand narratives one of the things they pointed out quite clearly is that there's there's there's a set of common mythological themes across many cultures and I tried to outline that in maps of meaning and that worked out quite nicely for me at least as far as I was concerned because once I had the basic archetypal structure mapped out it opened up all sorts of stories to me from all sorts of different cultures and that's been unbelievably useful like the Mesopotamian story of it the Anu mulisch when I figured out what that meant as far as I was concerned like I've never forgotten that it just seared itself into my memory and the same with the Egyptian stories and you know some Buddhist writings that I've read in some the daodejing is also very powerful so I think that things can be different on one level and the same at another but that humanity kind of coalesce is on what's the same over a reasonable period of time because there isn't that many ways that human beings can live properly as individuals and as groups together and so there's this constant force that makes our ethical presuppositions converge and then that's automatically expressed in the stories it's something like that now it's an imperfect process and it's full of error so so just one announcement well two announcements the next lecture I believe is November 14th so I'll hopefully finish off the story of Jacob looks like it and then I'm also appearing on a panel with God's odd and or an Amity on November 11th and there's still quite a few tickets available for that so if you're interested you could go to my website and pick up those tickets huh it should be well hopefully it'll be interesting I think it will be and might be too interesting that's one possibility so we'll see but I'm gonna do two more of these this year and I hope I get through the story of Joseph and then I can start in the New Year with it with Exodus and that's a story that I know quite well and that the Exodus and Leviticus and what's the one after that yes thank you so I'm very much looking forward to that because that is one killer story that so and I've got some surprises for that as well so anyways thank you very much for coming and hopefully we'll see you November 14th All right, so the last time I was here, many of you were as well, we got halfway through the story of Jacob and I've been digging underneath the story sporadically since then to try to find out whether other themes are being developed and I've got some things that I think are really interesting to talk about, so we'll get right into it. So, I'm gonna review a little bit first, we were talking about Jacob and I'll re-update his biography a little bit so that we can place ourselves in the proper context before we go on. So, his mother Rebecca gave birth to twins and the twins, even in her womb, were struggling and of course the story is that they were struggling for dominance the older or the younger against the older really because Jacob means "usurper".Rebecca had a  what would you call  a vision from God that said that Jacob would supplant Esau. So, even before her twins were born they were in a state of competition. And that's a recapitulation of the motif of the hostile brothers, right. It's a very very very common mythological motif and we already saw that really well developed in the story of Cain and Abel, right. And Cain and Abel were essentially the first two natural born human beings and they were instantly locked in a state of enmity. Which is symbolic of first the enmity that exists within people's psyche between the part of them you might say that's aiming at the light and the part of them that's aiming at the darkness. And I think that's a reasonable way of portraying it.Obviously it's a way that sort of rife with symbolism but my experience of people, especially when you get to know them seriously or when they're dealing with serious issues, is that there is quite clearly a part of them that's striving to do well in the world or even to do good and another part that's deeply sinned and embittered that that says "to hell with it" and is self-destructive and lashes out and really aims at making things worse. So, that seems to be a natural part of the human psyche and that's also reflected in the the idea of the fall and so those ideas are not easily cast away they're associated with the rise of self-consciousness right and in the story of the Garden of Eden and I think that's right because I do think that our self-consciousness produces that division within us because more than any other creature were intensely aware of our finitude and suffering and that tends to turn us at least to some degree against being itself. You know, I was watching a bunch of protesters in the US last week scream at the sky about Trump you know and it was interesting like I thought it was an extraordinarily narcissistic display but but despite that there was something symbolically appropriate about it. Yeah you know that movie I take it. Yeah, it's about the people I grew up with. So yeah, that's true man, I'm telling you that's true. So, the guy, the main actor in Fubar, who's quite bright but completely uncivilized gets testicular cancer and there's one great scene where he gets far too drunk and he's stumbling around the street you know in a virtually comatose state and of course he's not very thrilled with what's happened to him. And he's shaking his fist at the sky, it's pouring rain, and he's cursing God.And you know it's like well you can kind of understand his position so that kind of reminded me of these people who were yelling at this guy you know they were basically they were out dramatizing the idea of they were enraged at  well you could say god of course most of them wouldn't say that but but they were the ones yelling at the damn sky. I mean, you know so you got a he got a look at what they're doing rather than what they say and they were outraged that being was constructed such that Trump could have arisen as president and so well so this idea you know that we can be easily turned against being and work for its destruction is a really common common common theme it never goes away. You see it echoed in stories like with the new Marvel series, for example, you see the enmity between Thor and Loki that's a good example of the same thing or between Batman and the Joker there's Superman and Lex Luthor these there's these pairs of hero against villain that's a really dramatic and what everyone can understand that dynamic right it's a basic plot.And the reason it's a basic plot is because it's true of the battle within our spirits our own individual spirits it's true within families because sibling rivalry can be unbelievably brutal it's true between human beings who are strangers it's true between groups of people like it's true at every level of analysis and then in some sense it's it's archetypal true at least with regards to deep religious symbolism because you see that echoed in many stories as well so I think the clearest representation is probably Christ and Satan that's the closest to a pure archetype although there's in the old Egyptian stories there's Osiris and Seth or Horus and Seth and Seth is a precursor to Satan etymologically so it's a very very common motif and so that's what happens again in Rebecca's womb is that this thing this idea is played out right away and the two two twins are actually what would you call it there they have a superordinate destiny because one of them is destined to become the father of Israel and of course that's a pinnacle moment in the Old Testament obviously and arguably a pinnacle moment in human history now you know degree to which the stories in the Old Testament actually constitute what we would consider empirical history as a matter of debate but it doesn't matter in some sense because as I mentioned I think before in this lecture series know there are there are forms of fiction that are met a true which means that they're not necessarily about a specific individual although I generally think they are based on the life of specific individuals it's the simplest theory but who knows right but they're they're more real than reality itself because they abstract out the most relevant elements of reality and present them to you and that's why you watch fiction you know you don't you want you want your fiction boiled down right you want to boil down to the essence that's what makes good fiction and that essence is something that's truer than then plain old truth if it's handled well and so you know if you watch a Shakespeare play half a lifetime of events can go by in a Shakespeare play and it covers you know a wide range of scenes and so on and and so it's it's cut and edited and compressed all at once but because of that it blasts you with with a kind of emotional and ethical force that just the mere videotaping of someone's daily life it wouldn't even wouldn't even come close to approximating so then this motif of the hostile brothers that's a that's a deep deep archetypal truth and raychel two nations are in thy womb and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels and one people shall be stronger than the other and the elder shall serve the younger and so there's a inversion there right because as we've discussed historically speaking and traditionally speaking it's the elder son that to whom the disproportionate blessings flow there's some truth in that too even more what would you say more empirically iq tends to decrease as the number of children in the family increase the younger the old is the smartest generally speaking it isn't clear why that is but it might be that they get more attention and who knows so those of you who are younger can be very unhappy about that fact now Jacob okay so there's another there's another plotline here too because Abraham and and Rebecca are at odds at sorry Isaac and Rebecca are at odds about the children right so there's a there's an eatable twist to it too because well Isaac is allied with Esau who turns out to be the hunter type so he's your basic rough-and-tumble character you know and he's kind of a wild looking guy he'll Harry and he likes to be outside he lives in tents he likes to hunt he's a man's man that's one way of thinking about it whereas Jacob dwells in tents you know he doesn't go outside much he's more well maybe he's more introverted but he's certainly this sort of kid adolescent say who hangs around home and it there's some intimation that he's his mud well he's clearly his mother's favorite and with all the advantages and I suppose disadvantage does go along with that and Isaac and Rebecca don't see eye-to-eye about who should have predominance among the sons and Rebecca is quite complicit with Jacob in inverting the social order so the first thing that happens that's crooked is that Esau comes in from hunting and he's you know maybe he's been out for a number of days and he's ravenous and he's kind of an impulsive guy doesn't really seem to think about the long term very much and Jacob was cooking some lentil stew and Esau I want some of it and Jacob refuses and and then says that he'll trade his his birthright for it and Esau agrees which is a bad deal right it's a bad deal and so you you could say that Esau actually deserves what's coming to him although at minimum you'd have to think of them both as being equally culpable it's a nasty trick and so that's Jacob's first trick and then the second trick is that it's later and Isaac is old and blind and you know close to death and it's time for him to bestow a blessing on his sons which is a very important event apparently among these ancient people and Esau again is out hunting and Rachel dress dress is Jacob up in a hairy it puts a goat skin on his arm so he's kind of hairy like Esau and dresses him and Esau is closed so he smells like he's so and Isaac tells Esau to go out and hunt him up some some venison I think it is and which is a favorite of his and Rebekah has Jacob cook up a couple of goat kids and serve that to Isaac and play the role of Esau and so he does that it's pretty net damn nasty really all things considered you know to play a trick like that both on your brother and on your blind father and the inclusion with your mother it's not the sort of thing that's really designed to promote a lot of familial harmony and so especially because you've already screwed him over in a big way once you know you'd think you'd think that would be sufficient so anyways he's successful and Esau loses his father's blessing and so that Jacob ends up really in the position of the firstborn and it's quite interesting because you know God tells Rachel that Jacob is going to be the dominant twin and you'd think again with God's blessing or at least the prophecy that Jacob would end up being a good guy but he's certainly not presented that way to begin with which is also quite interesting given that he's the eventual founder of Israel and it's another indication of the realism of these old stories you know and it's it's quite amazing to me it's always been quite amazing to me how unpretty fight these stories have remained you know because you'd think that if you're even the least bit sinned especially if you had the kind of Marxist religion is the opiate of the masses kind of viewpoint which which is a credible viewpoint you know although it's wrong but it's correct well I I think it's a shallow I think it's a shallow interpretation and not part of the reason I think it's a shallow interpretation is because the stories would be a lot prettier if that was the case these characters wouldn't have this strange realistic moral ambiguity about them you know if you're gonna feed people a fantasy then it you want it to be like a Harlequin novel or or our greeting card or something like that you don't want it to be a story that's full of betrayal and deceit and murder and mayhem and genocide and all of that if that just doesn't seem all that what would you say calming I guess would be the right right answer so anyways Jacob gets away with this but Esau is not happy and and Jacob is quite convinced that he might kill him and I think that was a reasonable fear because he saw was a tough guy and he was used to being outside and he knew how to hunt and he knew how to kill and he actually wasn't very happy about getting seriously screwed over by his you know stay-at-home younger brother twice and so Jacob runs off and goes to visit his uncle and on the way and this is a very interesting part of this story he stops and to sleep and he takes a stone for a pillow and then he has this vision it's called a dream but the context makes it look like a vision of a ladder reaching up to heaven and with angels moving up and down the the ladder let's say and there's some representations of that I showed you some of them the last time we met but I'll read it to you first he lighted upon a certain place and Ty read there all night because the Sun was set and he took of the stones of that place and put them for his pillows and lay down in that place to sleep and he dreamed and beheld a ladder set up on the earth and the top of it reached to heaven and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it and behold the Lord stood above it and said I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father and the god of Isaac land whereon thou liest to thee I will give it and to thy seed and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth and thou shalt spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and the south so that lays out the canonical directions right so now there's a center with the canonical directions like the thing that you see you know that little symbol you see on maps it's the same thing that symbolically placed upon the earth so a center has been established with radiating well with with what with with directional lines radiating from it so it establishes as a place and in the end I seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed so that's pretty good news for Jacob and it's not self-evident why God is rewarding him for running away after screwing over his brother but that seems to be what happens and so here's a couple of representations classic representations the one on the right is William Blake is what I particularly like you know and Blake assimilates God with the Sun and with light right so that's quite a common mythological idea that that God is associated with light and the day behold I am with thee and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest and will bring me again into this land for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of and Jacob awaked out of his sleep and he said surely the Lord is in this place and I knew it not and he was afraid which is exactly the right response and said how dreadful is this place it is none other than the house of God and this is the gate of heaven and Jacob rose up early in the morning and took the stone that he had put for his pillows and set it up for a pillar and poured oil on the top of it and that's that's a more important thing than you think and we'll go into that a little bit more deeply because up to this point in this story there isn't anything really there isn't anything that's really emerged to mark a sacred space right there's no there's no cathedral there's no Church there's nothing like that but here's this idea that emerges that you can mark the center of something that and that's important and you mark it with a stone and stones a good way to mark things that that are important because the stone is permanent right and we mark things with stones now like we mark graves with stones for example because we want to make a memory and to carve something into stone to carve a stone and then to carve something into stone is to make a memory and to use stone is to make a memory because stone is permanent and to set it up right is to to indicate a center and so that's what happens and pours oil on the top of it which is kind of offering and he called the name of that place Bethel but the name of the city was called Las at the first and Jacob vowed a vow saying if God will be with me and will keep me in this way that I go and will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on then a tenth of what I earned I will give him I missed that that's interesting too because now there's a transformation of sacrifice right because until that point sacrifices have had been pretty concretize dit was the burning of something whereas here all of a sudden it's the offering of of productive labor per se like a tithe because it tithe is a form of sacrifice and so there's an abstraction of the idea of sacrifice no sacrifice it's really important that the idea of sacrifice gets abstracted right because it should be abstracted to the point where it's it's used the way that we use it today which is you know we make sacrifices to get ahead and everyone understands what that means but the sacrifices are generally some combination of psychological and and and practical so we're not acting them out we're precisely we're not dramatizing them at ritualizing and we actually act them out in our in the covenant that we make with the future and we do that well unless we're extraordinarily impulsive and aimless in our lives and have really no conception whatsoever of the future and are likely to sacrifice the future for the present which is it what he saw does right then we make sacrifices and you got to think like the idea of making sacrifices to make the future better is an extraordinarily difficult lesson to learn it took people god only knows how long to learn that you know like we have no idea it's not something that animals do easily chimpanzees don't store leftover meat you know they just and neither do wolves they just a wolf can eat about thirty pounds of meat in one sitting and that's that's where the idea of wolfing it down comes from they're not hiding it saving it for later you know they can't do that so they can't sacrifice the present for the future so this is a big deal that this that this happens now I want to tell you a little bit about the idea of the pillar because it's it's an unbelievably deep idea and it Orient's us in ways that we still don't it's still orienting us in ways that we don't understand and in fact it's actually the mechanism by which we're oriented or and if it's lacking then we become disoriented and so I'll show you some pictures and describe them first okay so first of all there's a walled city so let me tell you that you could think about that as an archetypal human habitation maybe it's a reflection of something like a fire in the middle of the plain or the forest or the jungle for that matter although it's kind of hard to get a fire going there imagine a fire ringed around with logs and perhaps ringed around with dwellings right so the fire is in the center and the fire defines the center and then as you move away from the fire you move out into the darkness right so the fire is light and communion and safety and as you move away from the fire you move out into the darkness and what's terrifying out beyond the perimeter so what's beyond the perimeter is terrifying you can feel that if you go camping somewhere that's wild you know you're pretty damn happy especially if the wolves are howling you're pretty damn happy to be sitting by the fire because you can see there the fire keeps the animals away and you know if you do wander into the bush into the darkness then you're on alert and you know you're predator detection systems are on alert and so you could think about the classical human habitation as two places one where your predator detection system isn't on alert another where your predator textured detection system is alert on alert and you could think about that roughly as the distinction between explored territory and unexplored territory and really the the founding of a place is precisely this is a lot of this I got from reading your chair le ah de the founding of a place is precisely the definition of a explored center set against the unexplored periphery and you know what's interesting about that so you can kind of think about that with regards to the walled city right everything in the wall is cosmos and everything outside the wall is chaos and you know but it also extends to the conceptual realm because imagine that you're the master of a field of study and so that's an interesting metaphor because a field is a geographical metaphor right and if in the center of the field are those things that everyone knows really well the axioms that everyone abides by in the field and then as you move towards the fringes you get to work towards the unknown towards the frontier of the discipline and as you become expert you move from the center to the frontier and so then you're on the border when you're when you're when you're a scholar a competent school you're on the border between the unexplored or the explored and unexplored and you're trying to further that border so even if you're just doing this abstractly it's the same thing and it's a reflection of the fact that every human environment concrete or abstract it makes no difference recapitulates the cosmos chaos dichotomy or the order chaos dichotomy and that's why in Taoism for example it's the union of chaos and order that constitutes being itself and that you stand on the border between chaos and order because that's the proper place to be to orderly to much in the explored you're not learning anything too much out there where the Predators lurk then you're frozen with terror and neither of those positions are desirable so and that's what you know and so you think and this is a concur reality obviously as well as a psychological reality there were reasons for those walls right because inside the walls where all the people like us and so that begs the question what does it mean for people to be like us and then outside the wall there rose all those people because they were the worst forms of predators because people are actually the worst forms of predators who aren't like us and the wall is there to draw a distinction between like us and not like us and so and that was a matter of life and death if you can tell that because I mean look at those walls they had to build those by hand and you know you do see walled cities that have three rings of walls so these people were terrified but not so terrified as the people who built three walls they were really terrified and they had their reasons so okay so now there's an idea that's that's reflected in the Jacob's Ladder story that the center where you put the pillar is also the place where heaven and earth touch and so that's that's a complicated idea I think that you can you know I'm trying to look at these stories from a psychological perspective and so then you could say that that's a symbolic place where the lowest and the highest come together and so it's a place where earthly being stretches up to the highest possible ethical abstraction and that's the center because one of the things that defines us say as opposed to them is that we're all united within a certain ethic that's what makes us the same this is a complicated line of reasoning and but I'll go back to it after I show you some more pictures but so that's that's the first idea is that the center is the place where the lowest and the highest touch simultaneously and so you could say that in some sense it specifies the aim of a group of people that's another way you know if you get together with people make a group even at work you group yourself around a project and that unites you and it unites you because you all have the same aim you're all pointing to the same thing and that makes you the same in some ways because if you're after the same thing I am then the same things are going to be important to you that are important to me and the same things are going to be negative to you that are negative to me because our emotions work out that way and that means I can instantly predict you I know how you're going to behave and so our aim which is basically our ethical aim it's because we're aiming at something better at least in principle we're aiming at something better so our ethical aim that unites our perceptions and that's what aligns our emotions and so that sort of begs the question if you're going to build a community around what aim should the community congregate okay so the idea here is that the center of the community is the pillar that unites heaven and earth so it unites the lowest with the highest so there's some intimation of the idea that it's the highest that unites the community okay and so keep that in mind and that's a very old idea as well that's the idea of the axis mundi which is the center pole that unites heaven and earth it's an unbelievably old idea tens of thousands of years old it might even stretch back to whatever our archaic memories quasi memories I don't know how what you would describe them archetypal memories of our excessively old ancestry and trees when the tree itself was in fact the center of the world and that it was ringed by snakes and chaos and so well we have no idea how old these ideas are but they're very very old and evolution is a conservative business once it builds a gadget then it builds new things on top of that gadgets like a medieval town right the center of the town is really old and new newer areas of the town get built around it but the center is still really old and that's what we're like you know our platforms like our our basic physiological structure this this skeletal body is some tens of millions of years old or older than that if you think about vertebrates it's much older than that and that's all conserved so everything's built on top of everything else alright so there there's a kind of a classic town and there's the idea I showed you this is Scandinavian World Tree same idea at unites heaven and earth and around the roots of that tree are snakes that eat this tree constantly so that's the idea that there's stability but there's constant transformation around that stability and at the same time the snakes are knowing in the roots there's streams that are nourishing it so it's sort of it's sort of an echo of the idea that life depends on death and renewal constantly because your cells are dying and being renewed constantly right if they are just proliferating then you have cancer if they're just dying then you die it you have to get the balance between death and life exactly right so that you can actually live which is also a very strange thing so and that tree is something that reaches from the bottom layers of being maybe the microcosm all the way to the macrocosm that's the idea anyways so then there's okay so there's there's Jacob and his and his pillar he's got this idea that you can mark the center with this stone like it sort of symbolizes what he was laying on when he dreamt but now he's got this idea you put something erect and it marks the center and it symbolizes his vision of the highest good something like that and the promise that's been made to him and then this is an Egyptian obelisk the pyramid on top of it that's in Paris it was taken from Luxor and it put in Paris and so that's a much more sophisticated instance of the same idea okay and there was a Stone Age cultures across Eurasia that put up these huge obelisks everywhere these huge like the Stonehenge is a good example of that although it's it's very sophisticated and there are also markers of places we don't know exactly what their function is but they're very much akin to this some permanent marker of place there's a good one so that's in st. Peters and I really like this one because you can see the echoes of jacob's vision for the establishment of a territory there right you've got the obelisk in the middle and then you've got the directions radiating from the center and of course save Peters this is the st. Peter's Basilica in Rome which is an absolutely unbelievable place it's just jaw-dropping and so there's the Cathedral at the back of it and then there's this circle of pillars that surrounds it you can just see them a little bit on on the middle left there that goes all the way around that entire enclosure and you know very large number of people can gather there and then so that pillar marks the center and that would be the center of Catholicism essentially that's what that represents right the the symbolic center of Catholicism although you could make the case that the cathedral is the center it doesn't really matter they're very close together and it's it's half a dozen of one and six or the other and then here's another representation of the same idea right is that this is why people don't like the flag to be burned you know because conservative people see the flag as the sacred thing that binds people together and so they're not happy when that sacred thing is destroyed even if it's destroyed in the name of protest whereas the people who burn flags think well there are times to dramatize the idea that the center has been corrupt and you can demonstrate that by putting it to the torch you know as a representation that that this that the corrupt center now has to be burned and transformed and the thing is they're both right they're both right all the time because the center is absolutely necessary and is sacred and is almost always also corrupt and in need of reparation that's also an archetypal idea and and that's a useful thing to know because you know it it's easy for young people in particular to think that well the world's going to hell in a handbasket and it's the pot fault of the last generation they've left us this terrible mess and you know we've feeling pretty betrayed about that and now we have to clean it up it's like yeah yeah people have been thinking that for like thirty five thousand years it's not new and the reason it's not new is because it's always true you know what you're handed is a sacred center with flaws always always that's partly because it's the creation of the dead right and the dead can't see and they can't communicate and so they're not in touch with the present and so what they've bequeathed to you apart from the fact that it might actually be corrupt which is a slightly different thing is at least blind in dead and so what the hell can you expect from something that's blind and dead you know you're lucky if it just doesn't stomp you out of existence so so that's a lovely photograph obviously and that's the establishment of a new centre then the the centre can be a cathedral too and often is of course in in classic towns European towns in particular although it's not only European towns that are like this there there's a center that's made out of stone so that would be the Cathedral and it's got the highest tower on on top of the tower there's often a cross and that's the symbolic centre so people are are drawn together around whatever the cross represents now that the cross obviously represents a center because it's an X right x marks the spot so the centre of the cross is the center and then the Cathedral is often in a cross shape which also marks the center and then in the cathedral there's a dome often and that's the sky and that's that ladder that reaches from earth to heaven so it's a recapitulation of the same idea so and people are drawn to that Center and the centre is the symbol of what unites them and what unites them is the faith that the cathedral is the embodiment of and you think well what does the faith mean and again we're approaching this psychologically and what it means is that we everyone who's a member of that group accepts the transcendent ideal of the group now the thing is if you're the member of a group you accept the transcendent ideal of the group that's what it means to be a member of a group so if you're in a work team and you're all working on a project what you've essentially done is decided that you're going to make the goal unquestionable right I mean you might argue about the details but if are tasked with something you know here's a job for you ten people organize yourself around the job you can argue about how you're going to do the job but you can't argue about the job then the group falls apart and so there's an act of faith in some sense the reason that the act of faith is necessary is because it's very very difficult to specify without error what that central aim should be given that there's any number of aims right and it's a very very difficult thing to figure out and this is something we're gonna do a little bit tonight is like what should the aim be around which a group would congregate you know that so so especially if it's a large group and it's a large group that has to stay together across very large swathes of time and the group is incredibly diverse you know what possible kind of ideal could unite a large group of diverse people across a very large stretch of time that's a really really hard question and I think part of the way that question has been answered is it's been answered symbolically and in images because it's so damn complicated that it's almost impossible to articulate so but obviously you need to have a center around which everyone can unite because if you don't then everyone's at odds with one another like if I don't know what you're up to and you don't know what he's up to we have no we're just strangers and we don't know that our ethics match at all then the probability that we're going to be able to exist harmoniously decreases rapidly to zero and that's obviously just no good that's a state of total chaos so we can't have that it's it's not possible to exist without a central ideal it's not possible and it's deeper than that it's deeper than that partly because it's I don't know I'll try to get this right this is the sort of thing that I was arguing with sam harris about you see your category system is a product of your aims that's the thing like if you have a set of facts at hand the facts don't tell you how to categorize the facts because there's too damn many facts there's a trillion facts and there's no way without imposing some ape I already order on them of determining how it is that you should order them so how do you order them well that's easy you decide what you're aiming at now how do you do that well I'm not answering that question at the moment I'm just saying that in order to organize those facts you need a name and then the aim instantly organizes the facts into those things relevant to the aim tools let's say those things that get in the way and a very large number of things that you don't have to pay attention to at all right it excludes Verte like if you're working on an engineering problem you don't have to worry about practicing medicine in your neighborhood you don't there's a bunch of like if you're focusing on a particular what would you say any any job any any set of skills implies that you're good at a small set of things and then not good at an incredibly large number of other skills it simplifies things and so you can use your aim as the basis of a category structure and so you also have to keep that in mind because what it means is as far as I can tell that what it means is that your category system itself which is what structures your perceptions is actually dependent on the ethics of your aim it's directly it's a moral thing it's directly dependent on your aim and that's a stunning idea if it happens to be true it's not how people think about thinking we don't think that way we like we think that we think deterministically let's say or that we think empirically or that we think rationally and none of that appears to be the case what we do is we pause it a valid aim and then we organize the world around the aim and there's plenty of evidence from that in in in psychological studies of perception right that that does look like how the the perceptual systems work mostly they ignore because the world is too complicated they focus on a small set of phenomena deemed relevant to whatever the aim is and then of course the aim is problematic again it's complex because the aim I have has to be a name that some of you at or at least don't object to because otherwise I'm not gonna get anywhere with my damn aim it has to actually be implementable in the world it has to be sustainable across at least some amount of time it can't kill me like it's really hedged in this aim it's it isn't any old thing there's hardly any things that it can be so you know Jacob's aim for example in undermining Esau almost gets him killed and you can understand why that's the other thing you think well that that was a nasty bit of work you can understand Esau's rage it's even though we're separated from the people in these stories by what four thousand years three thousand years something like that you know in immediately why everyone feels the way they do at least once you understand the context of the story that none of that's mysterious in the least so so there's the church and the church is underneath the cross right and so that's st. Peter's Basilica and so there's the cross on the globe on top of the Basilica and then there's the cross on the obelisk as well and so what that means is that and this is where things get insanely complicated is that the center is defined by whatever the cross represents now the cross represents a crossing point geographically it's it's certainly that the cross probably represents the body to some degree but then the cross also represents the place of suffering obviously and more importantly it represents the place of voluntary suffering transcended I'm speaking psychologically right not theologically that's what it represents and so you might say so here's the idea behind putting down the obelisk with the cross and saying that that's the center so that's the thing that everyone's aiming at and so the the idea would be well if you're going to be a member of the group defined by this obelisk then what you do is accept your position at the center of suffering voluntarily and therefore transcend it that's the idea and that is one hell of an idea it really is man that is a killer idea because it's actually a signal it's a really clear signal of psychological health you know because one of the things you do if you're a clinical psychologist and someone is paralyzed by fear is what you do is you break their fears down into relatively manageable bits and then you have them voluntarily confront their fears and it might also be things that they're disgusted by it's a if they have obsessive compulsive disorder but it produces very strong negative emotion whatever it is and then you have them voluntarily confront whatever it is that produces that overwhelming negative emotion and that makes them stronger that's what happens it doesn't make them less afraid it makes them more courageous and stronger and that is not the same thing it's seriously not it doesn't decrease the fear it increases the courage and so that's a mind-boggling idea and it's deeper you know one of the things that's really interesting about these archetypal ideas is that and maybe it's partly because of the hyperlink nature of the Bible that's part of it but it's not the whole thing is that no matter how deep you dig into them you'll never get to the bottom you know you hit a bottom you think god that's so unbelievably profound and then if you excavate a little underneath that you find something else that's even more profound and you think wow that's got to be the bottom and then you dig under that's like there's no bottom you can just keep digging down well as far as I can tell you can keep digging down layer after layer and we'll talk a little bit about more a little more about what the cross signifies as the center because you see what people were trying to figure out is what is it that we need to unite under right what's the proper thing to unite under I can give you another example so in the Mesopotamian societies the Emperor you know who was more or less an an absolute monarch he lived inside what was essentially a walled city and the god of the Mesopotamians was Marduk and Marduk was the figure who had eyes all the way around his head and he spoke magic words who is very attentive and very articulate and it was Marduk who went out and confronted the goddess of chaos the dragon of chaos and cut her into pieces and made up the world okay so you can kind of understand what that means so Marduk goes beyond the frontier into the place of predatory chaos and encounters the thing that's terrifying and then make something productive out of it so it's a hero myth and an mardik is elected to the position of preeminent God by all the other Mesopotamian gods because he manages that so the the mardik idea emerges up the Holy dominance hierarchy and hits the pinnacle so that and god only knows how long that took it would be the amalgamation of many tribes and then that the what the the distillation of all the tribal myths to produce this emergent story of what constitutes Tok God and then the job of the Emperor was to act out Marduk that's what gave him sovereignty so the reason that he was the center around which people organized themselves wasn't because he was when he was being a proper Emperor it wasn't because there was something super special about him like the power didn't exactly reside in him which is a really useful thing to separate right you want the power which is why it's kind of nice to have a symbolic monarch you get the symbolic power separated from the personality power right because otherwise they get conflated that's what happened in Rome it's a very you know you can see it tending to happen now and then in the u.s. like with the Kennedy dynasty's and that sort of thing so the idea was the Emperor had sovereignty as long as he was acting out Marduk properly and going out into the chaos and cutting it into pieces and making order that was his job so they used to take him outside the city on the new year's festival and strip him of all his Emperor garments and humiliate him and then force him to to confess all the ways that year he hadn't been a good Marduk so he wasn't a good ruler and so that was supposed to clue him in and wake him up right and then they would ritually reenact the Battle of Marduk against time out the chaos monster using statues and then if that all went well then the Emperor would go back in and the city would be renewed for another year and we still have echoes of that in our New Year's celebration right it's the same idea that's echoed down all those all those centuries thousands of years so it says such a staggeringly brilliant idea right because so part of the idea is that the thing that's sovereign so that's the pillar at the center that that everyone gathers around is at least in part the thing that courageously goes out into the unknown and make something useful out out of it for the community so that's very very smart it's very smart so this is another example of a center so these this is the flag this is the Union Jack and so it's made up of a bunch of crosses right and so the first cross the English cross that's the flag of st. George that's the flag of England and st. what is st. George do slaves the dragon exactly same idea right so safe George patron saint of England goes out and slays the dragon and frees the Virgin from the grip of the dragon same idea right so that's the center and then the second cross is called a saltier but it's another crucifix so it's the cross on which st. Andrew was crucified says so it's the same idea it's that the center is the center of suffering voluntarily undertaken cuz Saint Andrew was a martyr and then st. Patrick is the third cross what did st. Patrick do in Ireland chased out all the snakes right so it's the same thing right and so the flag of Great Britain is the combination of all of these three crosses that defines the center and that's what the flag is so that symbolizes all of that so that's you know completely mind-boggling so and there's more about st. Patrick - so he banishes the snakes after a 40-day fast and so that's an allusion to the 40 years that Moses spends in the desert and also the 40 days that Christ fasts in the New Testament and his walking stick when he plants it grows into a tree so that echoes all of this ideas about the center that we just described and he also speaks with the ancient Irish ancestors which if you remember is a characteristic of the shamanic rituals where we're so in the typical shamanic ritual which seems to be elicited by psychedelic use the shaman dissolved down past their bones and then they go up into heaven and speak with the ancestors and then they're introduced into the heavenly kingdom and then the flesh is put back on their bones and they come back and tell everybody what happened and that's a repeatable experience right the shamanic tradition is unbelievably widespread so all over Europe ancient Europe and Asia and perhaps as far down as South America right it's highly conserved and it's out of that tradition in all likelihood that our religious city Asian emerged so and you can see echoes of that here so so back to the story of Jacob and his ladder so that I can come again to my father's house in peace then shall the Lord be my god and this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be God's house and of all that that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee so that's that's also an echo I would say of the obligation of those who climb the power higher hierarchy to attend to those who are at the bottom right because if you think about the tithing as a form of wealth distribution which is essentially what it is the part of the ethic that defines the proper moral endeavor that's related to that Center is not to advance yourself at the expense of the entire community so if you're if you're fortunate enough so that you can rise in in authority and power and competence within the confines of a community you still have a obligation to maintain the structure maintain and further the structure of the community within which you rose now that's obvious right because if people didn't do that after a couple of generations the whole thing would fall apart so you know you you you it's it's not reasonable to destroy the game that you're winning it's reasonable to strengthen the game that you're winning and so that's another thing that also describes the ethic that should allow you to be an active member of the community around which that that gathers around that Center so so so one of the things I've learned about the hero mythology that I really really like is so you see this pretty clearly in the figure of Christ but because two things are conjoined in that story but Christ is also the here there's two kinds of heroes say there's the hero that goes out into chaos and confronts the dragon of chaos and gathers the the treasure as a consequence and then shares it with the community that's that's that's one the other form of hero is the hero who stands up against the corrupt state and rattles the foundation of the state has it collapse and then reconstructs it right so because the two great dangers to human beings are unprotected exposure to the catastrophes of the natural world and subjugation to tyranny right those are the two major dangers and so a hero is their ultimate hero is the person who reconstructs the structure of the state by using the information that he gathered by going out into the unknown that unites them both and so what that means here's that here's the rub as far as I can tell so a structure a center has two risks associated with it one is that it will degenerate into chaos and the other is that we'll rigidify into tyranny and it'll degenerate into chaos even if it just stays doing what it's doing so if it just does exactly what it's doing and it doesn't change it will degenerate because things change and if it doesn't change to keep up then it gets farther and farther away from the environment and it'll precipitously collapse and so and then if it just changes willy-nilly so that nobody can establish a stable centralized a game then it degenerates into chaos immediately and no one can get along so there's a rule for being longing to the community and the rule has to be that you have to act in a manner that sustains and that sustains the community and increases its competence that's the fundamental moral obligation for belonging and well and obviously soul right because why would you belong to a why would you walk into a clubhouse that was on fire like that's just not smart right if you're gonna be part of the game if you've decided that being part of the game is worthwhile you've also taken on the moral you've also decided even if you didn't notice it that you have to work to support that game because by deciding to play that game you've said that it's valuable and if it's valuable then obviously you should work to sustain and expand it because that's the definition of having a relationship with something that's valuable and so that's the criteria for membership in the community and that's partly why if you regard the cross say as the symbol of voluntary suffering you know suffering accept it voluntarily something like that which is means that there's another element of that too that's worth thinking about so you know the reason that cane gets so out of hand is because he's suffering and he won't accept it he certainly won't accept responsibility for it he's angry and bitter about it and no wonder right I mean we have to be realistic about these sorts of things there you guys all of you people are gonna suffer at some point in your life to the point where you're angry and bitter about it I mean there's just absolutely no doubt about that and you're even gonna think well it's no bloody wonder that I'm angry and bitter about it everyone would be and things are so god-awful that there's no excuse for them to even exist and like that's a powerful argument although I think it's ultimately self-defeating well that's kind of what the story of Cain and Abel that's kind of what the story of Cain and Abel what would you say that's the moral of the story of Cain and Abel essentially so what that means instead is that even under those conditions of relatively intense suffering you have to accept it voluntarily because otherwise it turns you against being and then you start to act in this terrible manner that makes everything worse and it seems to me that there's a contradiction in that if if the reason you're complaining that things are bad then it isn't reasonable for you to act in a manner that makes them worse right I mean even if it's no wonder that people do that but it's it's a degenerating game and so that's so the the idea part of the idea of the cross and the suffering that it represents is that if you can accept that voluntarily regardless of its intensity then you won't become embittered and resentful and vengeful to the point where you pose a danger to the stability of the community so or to your own stability for that matter cuz it's you know it might be your own stability the stability of your family the stability of the community and the stability of the world it might be all of that and increasingly I think it is all of that so okay so now Jacob we get the second part of Jacob story he goes to meet his uncle Lebon and he meets Rachel there again by oh well he falls in love and goes to live with levan there are two daughters there Leah as well as Rachel Leah is not a particularly attractive person it isn't exactly clear why but the story makes it quite clear she's definitely the least desirable of the two daughters and the story makes reference to her eyes and it isn't clear if there's something wrong with her physiologically or if there's something wrong with her attitude it's not obvious but doesn't really matter the point is she's the older daughter but she's the less desirable one Jacob stays a month which is the limit of hospitality in in that time if you stayed for a month you were welcome but you had to work for your keep I think after about three days something like that which seems rather reasonable and so he stays a month and then he has a chat with Lebon and he says he's fallen in love with Rachel by this time and he says I'll stay with you and work for seven years and then all weird Rachel if and the band says that's a fine deal and then the seven years passes and there's a wedding ceremony it's quite a long thing and the bride is veiled and the bride goes into the tent with with Jacob and if I remember the story correctly I haven't looked at it for a month or so rachel is outside the tent speaking but leah is inside the tent and so Jacob thinks he's getting married to Rachel but he's actually getting married to Leah and this is it's an inversion a because he's in the dark like Isaac was when he fooled Isaac so now it's Jacob's turn to be in the dark and he gets betrayed by his uncle and his bride-to-be Rachel and her sister in a manner that's broadly parallel to the trick that he pulled on Esau and so there's a karma notion there which I which I'd like you know I mean you might think of karma as a superstitious idea but and there are ways of interpreting it that might make it the case but I don't think that's what it is it's that no bad deed goes unpunished it's something like that it's like you know maybe you've done something bad to someone and therefore there's part of you that feels quite guilty about that hopefully and that part is looking for punishment to set the stage right and you might think well no but things are yes unless you're a psychopath that's how things work if you're interested in that kind of thing you should read Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment because it's the definitive study of that sort of phenomena right because in that book the main protagonist Raskolnikov gets away with murder like he does it successfully no one suspects him and he drives himself so crazy with guilt that he basically falls into the hands of the police he drives himself into the hands of the police because he can't tolerate what he did it's very it's amazing it's amazing book but anyways the point is he Jakub falls prey to the same sort of crookedness that he used to ratchet himself up the ladder and that happens far more often in life and people think and it's really not like he can complain about it right not if he has any sense it's like he does he brings Leah out to see Lebon and he says what's what's with this sister you know and Lebon basically says to him in our culture it's the custom to marry the eldest daughter first which is exactly right and he said well it would bring you know he's rationalizing obviously because he's just screwed over Jacob in a major way but it's a little late to take it back that the marriage has been consummated and the ceremony has been complete and all hell would break out if there was any attempt to sever the relationship so that's how it is so Leah's married and Jacob has the wrong wife so then so this is Jacob there you see on the left he's got the little flowery hat and he's pointing to Leah and he's saying like what what's up here and love the band you know Laband 'is tough old goat and he's not really all that sad about it in fact you can imagine that he's kinda good so so okay then he has to work another seven years and he gains rachel but because god is a tricky character there's another twist in this story Rachel turns out not to be very good at having children or Rachel and Jacob turn out not to be very good at having children but Leah she's really good at having kids so she provides Jacob with Reuben Simeon Levi or let's leave I believe and Judah and the names of those meanings of those names are there Reuben means see a son Simeon means hearing though I think that was the Lord heard my prayer I think that's what that was Levi means joined Judah means praise to yahwah and it's Judah from whose tribe Christ arises Judah is essentially promoted to the status of firstborn later in the story this is important because Reuben Simeon and Levy all do something reprehensible and so Judah gets gets promoted to firstborn and that's partly why in the logic of this narrative that it's from the tribe of Judah that Christ arises so so now while this is going on Rachel is like suicidally desperate for children she's jealous of her older sister who's rather ill-favored as we pointed out but who seems to be damn good at producing sons and she's really not happy with Jacob and so she choose him out and Jacob basically says like what do you want me to do about it I'm not God which is a reasonable response I would say and so in her desperation she gives Jacob illa who's her maidservant we've seen that sort of thing happened before and - Billa produces two children Dan and Neff Kelly the reason I'm detailing out all these sons it's Gordon because Jacob is the founder of Israel and his sons are the founder of the 12 tribes so it's a pivotal moment in the story right it's it's because he's that he's the fundamental patriarch of of those who wrestle with God because as we'll see that's what the name Israel means he gets the name Israel you'll see why in a while but but it's you need to know these genealogies in this situation because they play an important role in everything that happens afterwards so Naphtali is the second and her name or his name means with great wrestling's I have wrestled with my sister right contended with her and have prevailed so that gives you some indication of the tension in the household now leah is now past bearing children she gives Jake Jacob her maidservant to Zilpah to keep up with her sister I guess and now Zilpah bares to children for Jacob so he's piling up the kids left right and center here one of them is named gad good fortune and the other is named Asher happy or blessed so there's more rivalry going on between the sisters this is quite an interesting little story so Reuben who's Lea's daughter goes out and looks for Mandrake's now Mandrake's have aphrodisiac property so that's a little odd to begin with but it doesn't matter that's what happens and Rachel is Rachel wants the Mandrake's because she's still interested in having some children and so she bargains with Leah to give her a night with Jacob in exchange for the Mandrake's and more sons emerge as a consequence of that so then Rachel finally gives birth Joseph and Joseph plays a key role in the last story in Genesis which I hope we'll get to in the next lecture and then we can close off Genesis that's the plan anyways so now Jacob isn't really very happy about the whole arrangement because he he's been there 14 years and he's got two wives it's not too bad but he you know he got he the bargain wasn't exactly clean he doesn't really trust la Bannon and there's no reason for him to do so levan was poor before Jacob came Jacob turns out to be a very useful person to have around and so he tells Lebon he wants to leave and go back to his home country and that he'll take the speckled and spotted cattle the brown sheep and the spotted and speckled goats from the flock and they're in the minority so that's the idea and sola ban or lab and takes all those animals out of his flock so there was an idea that the speckled goats and the brown sheep would breed true so if you have two male goat and a female goat and they're both speckled they'll have speckled kids that's the theory and the same with brown sheep and so what Lebon does is he takes all the speckled animals out of the flocks gives them to his son and they go three days away with them so that Jacob is left with the flock but with no with none of these animals now the idea was that all the what newborns were going to be his and so what Lebon is basically done is set it up so that in principle Jacob is going to get nothing for his work so that's another time when Jacob experiences betrayal you know it's almost as if God isn't done with reminding him of the magnitude of what he did in the past that that's the moral of the story in some sense now there's a weird little twist in the story here so what Jacob does is some sympathetic magic and so when the animals are rutting he puts speckled objects in front of them speckled branches and so forth I guess to remind them about what they're supposed to be producing something like that and it works and so all these animals that Lebon left are are producing spotted animals like mad and so that's I guess God's changed his mind and let Jacob off the hook slightly here so soon he was very wealthy much cattle maidservants men servants camels analysis Laban's son sons become jealous and Lebon is outraged well you know obviously there's some competition there between Jacob and the sons which is hardly surprising and the blonde played this trick to strip Jacob of all his property and instead he got far more than he was going to get to begin with so you can imagine that's been a bit annoying so Jacob thinks he better get out of there so he tells Rachel and Leah and said unto them I see your father's countenance that is not toward me as before but the god of my father has been with me and you know with all my power I've served your father and your father has deceived me and changed my wages ten times but God so far has suffered him not to hurt me if he said thus the speckled shall be thy wages then all the cattle bore speckled and if he said thus the ringstraked shall be thy hire then all the cattle bore ringstraked thus God has taken away the cattle of your father and given them to me and they decide to sneak away and they're unhappy with the inheritance lack of inheritance from the man so as they sneak away Rachel steals the idols that her father has in his house and it's not exactly obvious why there's a lot of contention about why she's doing that some of them is to punish him to bring with her the images of her ancestors you know maybe she's lonesome moving away from home just out of spite to show him that the idols were actually powerless for protection to stop her father from divining the route of their escape that last one is the strangest one because the idea would be that Lebon would have used some sort of ritual with the idols that would help him infer their escape route and then could chase them so anyways that's the range of speculation about that I think it sounds to me mostly like a little act of revenge maybe with a bit of loneliness mixed in Laband pursues them but God comes in a dream to tell him to leave Jacob unharmed hmm LaVon catches up with him and reproaches Jacob saying that he would have thrown a great party if he would have known that they were going to leave you know he didn't want them to sneak away in the night and you can't tell from the story whether that's true or not and you know these people were pretty rough and pulse of I would say and maybe there was a 50% chance of a slaughter and a 50% chance of a party who knows I've been to parties like that actually so Laband complains that his gods are gone and Jacob says that whoever has them he will have them killed and Rachel who's really quite a sneaky character all things consider basically claims that she's having her period and she's sitting on the carpet with all the idols underneath and she can't move and so they search everywhere and can't find them and she's like laughing away behind her hand about that sneaky little maneuver but she doesn't die so that's probably a good thing so the ban checks everything out checks the camp out and he can't find anything so they reconcile and so that's the first reconciliation that Jacob engages in it's sort of like the what would you say the karmic dad is being paid that's one way of thinking about it that's so he got punished for his wrongdoing he's learned his lesson perhaps and it's it's that's good enough as far as he's concerned you know he got away good enough and they make peace so then the next thing that happens as they're travelling is that Jacob was left alone and there wrestled a man man angel God it's not clear we'll go with angel with them until the breaking of the day or God and when he saw that he prevailed not against him he touched the hollow of his thigh and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint as he wrestled with him and he said let me go for the day breaks and Jacob said I will not let you go unless you bless me and the angel said unto him what is thy name and Jacob said Jacob and the angel said thy name shall no more be called Jacob so the supplanter right the the overthrow ur with that kind of intonation of or implication of crookedness but Israel which means Hui who wrestles or strives successfully with God for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men and has prevailed that's quite a story I like it's it's I don't know I don't know exactly what to make of it there's obviously a symbolic level of meaning which is that that is what human beings do in some sense is they they wrestle I would say they wrestle with the divine even with the concept of the divine for that matter and but the question is do they prevail like it's got an odd thing that Jacob actually seems to win this battle right or at least he wins it enough so that whoever he's wrestling this divine figure that he's wrestling is willing to bestow a blessing on him I guess maybe that's a testament to his courage it's something like that maybe it's an indication that he has paid for his sins sufficiently so that he's sort of back on the moral high ground but but I think it's really telling that the transformation of the name from Jacob to Israel and that what Israel means is he who wrestles with God or who struggles with God and perhaps successfully but it's also so interesting that he actually emerges victorious you know you wouldn't necessarily think that that would be a possibility especially given you know God's rather hot-headed nature in the Old Testament you don't wanna mess with him too much but but Jacob does it successfully but even more importantly is the idea that whatever Israel constitutes which would be to say the land that Jacob founds is actually composed of those who wrestle with God I think that's an amazing idea because it also seems to me to shed some light on perhaps what was meant by belief in those days you know like I've often thought of Rett of marriage as a wrestling match right if you're lucky the person that you marry is someone you contend with it's not exactly I don't think it's exactly it's not tranquil precisely you know you might have noticed that some of you and but but the thing is if you have something to contend against then that strengthens you and and that's actually better than having nothing to contend against and so Jakob is the person who's also strengthened by the necessity of this contending and that seems to be the proper relationship with God or the angel is that contending the battling right rather than some sort of kind of loose weak statement of belief I mean I'm not trying to denigrate that to any great degree it just doesn't seem like the right mode of conceptualization right because human beings are aren't like that were contentious creatures and that's actually seems to be something that meets with God's favor in this situation so especially given that that's actually what he names the well the whole kingdom of the chosen people is the idea is that that's composed of those who contend with God so that's that's a hell of an idea that that's for sure and Jacob asked him and said tell me I pray thee thy name and he said wherefore is it thou dost ask after my name so there's no that's not happening and he blessed him there and Jacob called the place of the name of the place Peniel for I or penny'll for I've seen God face to face and my life is preserved and he passed over Peniel the Sun rose upon him and he halted upon his thigh now Jacob does walk away it injured from this right so he has a permanent limp after that and so that's also an indication of just how dangerous that contention actually is like he gets blast he wins but he doesn't get away scot-free and so now so Jacob goes back to Esau and he's terrified even though it's been 14 years he thinks maybe his heart headed brother hasn't calmed down yet and he has good reason to think that I would say so he sends messengers to Esau who then sets out with 400 men and so Jacob is not very happy with this whole idea and he breaks his people into two bands so that maybe half of them cannot be killed and then he takes from his large flocks a bunch of animals and a bunch of servants and he sends them out to meet he saw basically to say look I'm I'm I'm a jerk and sorry about the whole birthright thing and and here's some animals and you know maybe maybe that's the beginnings of an apology it's something like that and so but he's not very convinced that that's actually going to work but he saw who actually turns out to perhaps have matured in the interim perhaps that's one way of thinking about it meets Jacob and says that just seeing him is enough but Jacob insists that he takes the gift and Esau accepts and which is probably a wise thing because even if he saw is 95% convinced that just seeing his brother is enough there's probably 5% of him that's still really not all that happy and so you have to be careful you know when you say that you forgive someone because there might be a part of you that really doesn't that really needs something else before you can actually say okay look fine you know and you don't want to fool yourself about that because that 5% that hasn't been completely convinced will find its voice at some point and then maybe undermine the whole reconciliation process you don't want to think that you're any better than you are or any nicer than you are it's not helpful and so he saw a smart I think so while Jacob smart to say no no like thanks a lot but take the damn goats and Jacob and Esau is smart enough to accept that and he might do that maybe - you know - please Jacob but also I think so that there really is the possibility of establishing peace because hypothetically the gift that's being offered is of sufficient magnitude to erase the debt of the loss of the birthright it's something like that right it's the payment of the real debt and Esau said what meanest thou by all this drove which I met and Jacob said these are to find grace in the sight of my Lord and Esau says I have enough brother keep thou keep that that thou hast unto thyself and Jacob said and this is interesting statement I think no I pray you if if I have now found grace in thy sight take the present at my hand for therefore I have seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God and now was pleased with me and so that's so he's he's taking the Honorable judgment of his brother because it is honorable because he saw did get betrayed so he has a right to be standing in judgment and he equates that judgment with with what would you say with the highest of virtues it's appropriate judgment and so he wants to make complete amends to Esau as if Esau as a representative of the divine element of justice and I guess that's convincing to ease so it's quite a thing to say you know that I need to be reconciled to you because that would simultaneously reconcile me with God it's like it's crucial this is between us but it's there's a higher principle at stake that's vital and I think that is the case with betrayal that's very frequently the case because if you betray someone you really have violated you've deeply violated what can only be called a sacred trust it's the right terminology for that take it I pray the my blessing that is brought to thee because God has dealt graciously with me and because I have enough and he urged him and he took it so you know the story seems to be something like well Jacob was kind of an arrogant crooked deceitful character maybe / impressed with his own ability he thought it was pretty amusing to pull a fast trick or two on his brother then he ran off which is not all that brave and then he got walloped of a lot and perhaps learned something and then when he came back you know he was a different person and so that's a that's a reasonable story and you know he he has to repent completely of about what he did before he can rectify the situation properly and he's willing to do that so that's an interesting idea too because it's it's it's the early reflection of the idea that it is if you do something wrong in the past a that you can learn from it right so that you're actually capable of learning and be that you can set the balance right in the present those are very optimistic ideas you know because you might say well once you've committed some sort of crime that's it there's no hope for you but that's pretty rough because the probability that you've done unethical things at some point in your life is a hundred percent and so if there was no way of setting the balance right after that then everybody would be doomed so so then the story gets rough again Jacob settles in Shalem Shalem Dinah his daughter goes looking around for friends Shechem the son of Hamor lays with her and then once her for his wife he actually has the order reversed there that turns out to be a problem Jacob hears of this the fathers talk and so they make an agreement the agreement is is that if all of hammers men including hammer and his son are circumcised so that's the proper offering I guess that brings them into the familial fold and indicates that they're willing to make a sacrifice to do so especially after you know Shechem put the cart before the horse let's say the man of hammer or circumcised they agree to do so that turns out to be a big mistake so well they're laying around the next day suffering madly from the circumcision Simeon and Levi come in they sneak in and kill all of them and take their wealth and their women and children that's rough it's rough yeah I guess you guys noticed that a so-so at their honor societies right and there's still lots of honor societies in the world and so they don't take kindly to what happened to their to their sister although they don't kill her so now it turns out that yeah it says as it came to pass on the third day when they were sore the two of the sons of Jacob Simeon and Levi Dinah's brethren took each man his sword and came upon the city boldly and slew all the males and they slew hamor and shechem his son with the edge of the sword and took Dinah out of Chekhov's house and went out the sons of Jacob came upon the slain and spoiled the city because they had defiled their sister it took the sheep and the oxen and the alysus and that which was in the city and that was which it was in the field and all their wealth and all their little ones and their wives took they came captive and spoiled everything else that was in the house and Jacob actually turns out not to be very happy about that because he'd met with hammer and they'd like hammered out a deal and that and that's where they were living and so he figured well that he was making the best of a bad law let's say and his sons went behind his back and Jacob says to Simeon and Levi you have troubled me to make me meat to make me stink among the inhabitants of the land among the Canaanites and the perizzites and I being few in number they shall gather themselves now together against me and slay me and I shall be destroyed I had my house and they said should he deal with our sister as with a harlot and God said unto Jacob and this is where we get back to the idea of the center God says to Jacob arise go to Bethel and dwell there okay so Bethel was where Jacob had originally put that pillar so now it's back so he it's it's it's a real hero's journey right there's there's the place that he has a set place he goes out and has these adventures and and undergoes a moral transformation reconciles and then he comes back to the same place right as it transformed person so that's a full hero cycle arise go to Bethel and dwell there and make that there an altar unto God that appeared to thee when thou fled us from the face of Esau thy brother and Jacob said to his household and to all that were with him put away the strange gods that are among you and be clean and change your garments and let us arise and go up to Bethel and I will make there an altar unto God who answered me in the day of my distress and was with me in the way which I went and they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand and all their earrings which were in their ears and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem and they journeyed and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob so Jacob came to laws which is in the land of Canaan that is Bethel so that's the place where he put up the pillar to begin with he and all the people that were there with him and he built there an altar and called the place el Bethel because their God appeared to him when he fled from the face of his brother and God appeared to Jacob again when he came out of peda an aram and blessed him and God said unto Him thy name is Jacob thy name shall not be called any more Jacob which you remember means usurper but Israel shall be thy name he who wrestles with God and he called his name Israel and God said to him I am God Almighty be fruitful and multiply a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee and Kings shall come out of thy loins and the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac to thee I will give it and to thy seed after thee will I give the land and God went up from him in the place where he talked with him and God set up Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him a pillar of stone and he poured a drink offering thereon and he poured oil thereon and Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him Bethel so he's returned to the central place which had been given to him as his territory Rachel dies in labor in the process giving birth to an only son of my sorrow whose name was then changed to Benjamin son of the right hand now Reuben so Simeon and Levi have already done something unforgivable now Reuben it's Reubens term he sleeps with Bilhah who's Jacob Israel's concubine so he's the third of the sons to make an unforgivable error and Jacob / Israel gets wind of it so Reuben is no longer he would have been the premier son given that the two older sons were put out of the running so to speak because of their disobedience and impulsive vengeful cruelty and then Reuben can't keep is what do they say well you get the idea yeah yeah seems to be something that's still quite surprisingly common so then we have this story that that basically ends with this establishment of the twelve tribes of Israel from Leah there's Reuben Simeon Levi Judah Issachar and Zebulun from Zilpah there's gad and ashur from billah there's Dan and Naphtali and from Rachel there's Joseph who figures extraordinarily importantly in the next story that we're going to cover which hopefully will wrap up Genesis and Benjamin and so now Israel itself is established and so then we turn to actually going to end this early tonight that's quite bloody miracle so the story then turns to Joseph and the story begins essentially now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children because he was the son of his old age and he made him a coat of many colors and so what that seems to me to indicate you know coats in dreams very often seems to be particularly true of women's dreams that's that's been like my clinical observation clothing and footwear in particular symbolizes a role and that makes sense right because you address for the roles it's not that big a mystery but so then you might say well what does a coat of many colors indicate and you know if you think of that multiplicity there it's something like the mastery of multiple domains right or maybe something like plural potentiality and so Jacob is is Israel's or Joseph is Israel's favorite and because he sees in him this excess possibility and he basically tells his other sons that Jacob is going to be the head son which they are not happy with right because he's just this young punk fundamentally and he's clearly his father's favorite and he gets this coat that's sort of indicative of this higher status and so Israel inadvertently sets up a tremendous amount of sibling rivalry in the household again and that that's the the understructure of the last story in Genesis and so in in the last of this lecture series for 2017 we'll cover the story of Joseph and and his coat of many colors and what happens as a consequence of his of the favoritism shown to him by his father and we'll track what happens as a consequence of that and so I'm going to stop there because I'm finished. Hello, Dr. Peterson. This is an idea I've been wrestling with for quite some time now. This idea of a lot of like the greatest sources of wisdom that we've received through human history either through texts, experiences, or scriptures seems to always come from people going to isolation and then coming back. So I've had a hard time trying to figure out from a scientific point of view or evolutionary point of view what would compel an organism that's behavior is centered around surviving in especially for humans as social groups as well as reproducing to want to go into isolation and then not only that but obtain some level of information that actually helps the group in coming back. That's a really good question. Okay so, there's this neuroscientist neuropsychologist named el Conan Goldberg and Goldberg was a student of Alexander Luria and Alexander Luria was a Russian neuropsychologist perhaps the foremost neuropsychologist of the mid to late 20th century and he had students Sokolov in vineger dov'è who discovered the orienting reflex for example. The orienting reflexes the reflex that orients you when something anomalous interferes with your goal directed behavior it's a major discovery like one of the one of the four or five most important discoveries that have ever been made in in in psychology I would say certainly in neuroscience so Luria was a big deal and he was the first person who really established the functional role of the prefrontal cortex as well. And had it very nice overall view of how the brain function his book was written in 1980 and it's still there's still loss in it that's really useful which is pretty strange for a science that's advanced that quickly. Anyways so, Goldberg came from a great pedigree I believe Maria's teacher was Pavlov if I remember correctly. So anyways, Goldberg you know you hear some of you may have heard the idea that the left hemisphere is more or linguistic than the right hemisphere is that left hemisphere is specialized for language and the right hemisphere is specialized for nonverbal imagistic communication the left hemisphere has a pretty well organized microstructure and the right hemisphere is more diffuse as well and that's true in left-handed males in particular so the circuitry can be switched around a bit but it's okay the modules are basically the same although they can be moved a little bit. But, Goldberg thought that it isn't language versus non language it's routine versus novelty and so the left hemisphere and there's a neuropsychologist physician named Ramachandran who's done some very interesting work that's pertinent to this maybe I'll tell you a story about him. Anyways, Goldberg believed that the right hemisphere say you have very old systems underneath both both cortical hemispheres that do things like respond to anomaly to the thing that doesn't fit to the predator in the distance. Some of that's extraordinarily fast so that would be like a snake reflex that can move you away from a snake in less time than it takes the snake to bite and it's really a reflex it doesn't even hit your brain it's really super fast and then there's a defensive Crouch that's that's instantiated higher up in the nervous system but that's still remarkably fast and then there's fear as an emotion and and the orientation of attention and then there's the cognitive processing and that all streams out across a time span right and maybe that time span is half a second so you and that's really a long time if something is attacking you so you got those initial responses are quite primitive but they're extraordinarily fast. All right, so there's subcortical structures that orient you towards novelty and prepare you for freezing or for attending and the right hemisphere seems to be dominated by those systems so imagine that what happens is that something threatens you you orient towards it the right hemisphere produces a bunch of images about what it might be so imagine that's what happens when a child is afraid of the dark. The child's on the bed they're afraid of the dark they're crouched because they're frozen like a prey animal and their right hemisphere is producing monsters to inhabit the the darkness that are the child's hypotheses about what might be out there okay because that's what you want to know right you want to know what's out there and then you want to know what to do about it I can tell you two kids dreams that are sort of relevant to that. So, when my daughter was about three she came into the bedroom that my wife and I had and she was crying she'd had a nightmare and she said that she saw a stream and there was garbage all over the stream and she didn't like that and so I sat her down I said okay so imagine the stream with the garbage in it now imagine that you're taking the garbage out and throwing it in the garbage bin and so she and I got her to like visualize that because that kind of puts her back in the semi dream state and then she cleaned up the mess and then she could go off to sleep now you you could tell the child don't worry about the dream isn't real. That's true because it's not real like other daytime things are but it's not like it's not real it's a dream like a dream is real it's just not the same kind of real and so what I did with her was to indicate to her practically that if she saw something a normal uh something that was out of place right something that was a mess that it was within her capacity to set it right. Okay so now your right hemisphere tells you what monsters might inhabit the the darkness now what you have to do is figure out there's two things you have to figure out one is what to do about a given monster and now there is to do what about is to figure out what to do about the class of all possible monsters, right. That's a whole different thing that's something that only human beings are capable of that level of abstraction right and so what you might do about a particular monster is hide or go out and get rid of it if it was just an actual animal right but that doesn't help because there's all the other potential predators that are still there and so maybe you can go hunt all them down but that doesn't help either because you can't hunt them all down it's not or it's not very likely anyways so instead what you have to do is figure out how to configure yourself so that you're in the best possible position to fight off the monsters when they come. That's your best bet. all right so now people are trying to figure this out forever they're trying to figure out what's the answer to the problem of the class of all possible monsters part of that sacrifice so there are routines for example in in Hinduism with the goddess Kali you make offerings to Kelly who's this devouring goddess and then she turns into her benevolent counterpart and so sacrifice is actually one way that you can tame the monsters if you think about the monster has the set of all negative future potentialities you make the proper sacrifice as those monsters stay at bay but then there's heroism as an alternative to which which means the act of confrontation of the class of all possible monsters and the building of yourself up and into this sort of courageous person that can do that it took a tremendous amount of meditation to transform those images say of the monsters in into it or to solve the problem of the class of those monsters so now I'll tell you another child stream so some of you have probably heard this before but it's such a great dream that it's worth it's worth telling so now is that my sister-in-law's house once and her son was running around he's about four very precocious very verbal very intelligent running around with a knight hat on and a sword so he's engaged in this pretty intense play world and when he goes to sleep he puts the knight hat on his pillow and the sword by his pillow and at the same time he having night terrors so he's waking up and had been for a number of weeks Nate waking up screaming and then but he doesn't know why there's some things that aren't going so well in the household and the parents get divorced shortly afterwards okay so that's oh that's that's what's going on underneath right and he's also gonna go to kindergarten and so he's about to go into the world and so he's coping with this you know so I'm watching him zoom around as this night and thinking that's pretty cool and that night he woke up and had a it was screaming and so we're all at breakfast the next morning and I said did you dream anything and he got really intense and he said yes I had a dream and I said well what was the dream and he said well I was out on this field and all these like dwarfs came up to me they were only about as high as my knees and they didn't have any arms they have powerful legs and they were covered with like hairy feathers and grease and there was cross carved in the top of their head and they had beaks and whenever he moved anywhere they would jump at him with his with their beaks and there were lots of them and everyone like just said nothing at breakfast it was like yeah cuz and he was right into this story and so we were all like yeah well huh there are that accounts for all the screaming and so and then he said yeah and then in the background there was a dragon and every time the dragon puffed out smoke it would turn into these dwarves it's like oh man kid you really got a problem there you got you got beat things that are biting you and you can kill them and that's fine but then there's the dragon just puffing out new ones so it's like a Hydra problem right the old Hydra is the serpent you cut off one had seven more grow it's not a good thing and it's such a cool dream because it really portrayed this class of all possible monsters problem so you've got the specific monsters and that's a problem so you got to get rid of them but that's not the problem the problem is is that there's a there's something in the background that's just generating monsters like mad and so I said to him what do you think you could do about that and that's a that's a loaded question right that's like leading the witness in the trial you don't get to ask a question like that because it implies that it implies the answer what could you do about that is not any different than saying you could do something about that right so so I hinted at that as a possibility and his eyes lit up now you remember he's already running around as at night Hey so he kind of already knew what to do because he had the whole sword in the Hat and with that you know that you can go after the drag and he kind of got that and he said I'd get my dad and then I jump up on top of the dragon and I'd poke out both of its eyes with my sword and then he'd go right down its throat to the fire box where the fire comes out and I carve out a piece of the fire box and then I'd used that as a shield and I thought yes right right man it's so smart eh because he got the thing instantly he knew that he knew so imagine first of all he thought okay I have to go to the heart of the problem right and really to the heart not to the dragon but right down the dam thanks gullet right to the place where the fire was actually being it was actually being created because there it was there you could find the shield and that he'd take this thing that was fireproof and make a shield out of it and so that was just he had bloody perfect it was so cool and you think well how could a kid come up with that and there's a bunch of answers I mean one is we know snake fear is innate we know that now there's been recent research data that that has demonstrated that okay so and we've been preyed on and been predators for a very long period of time so the idea that and I found something else interesting about the brain out that dubrow out about the brain recently - and book I was reading by Ray Kurzweil called how to build a mind I think that's what it was called it was quite a good book so I think it was in that book or it was in the neuroscience paper I was reading doesn't matter but it was in one of those two places so you know that scanning technology has got more and more high resolution over the last few years right it just gets more and more high-resolution all the time and so people are now able to look at the micro structures of the brain in a way that hasn't been possible before and so the old idea with the cortex basically was that cortex was full of a bunch of neurons and then when one neuron and another fired at the same time they would wire together and that's kind of how your brain learned to make connections it's a bit more complicated than that but that will do and then it was found that it wasn't quite that simple because what your cortex is made out of are these columns of neurons that are duplicated sort of like a like centipedes legs you know it's very simple genetic code to add another leg set of legs to a centipede it's sort of like that with your brain it's made out of all these columns and the columns are basically already quite wired up and then as you learn the columns wired together okay so there's some pre-existence structure there but there's more preexisting structure than what that was thought so it's it's basically that there are already tracts that link columns together that are in different parts of the brain and the columns can or the columns themselves can send out dendrites to these superhighways which are already there and then the superhighway is there and then it can generate connections to the columns at the end of the superhighway so what that means is that there's a tremendous amount of cortical structure already in place but there's plasticity around that and when I read that I thought well that's part of the source of the archetypes there's already an archetypal structure there that as well as the subcortical structures so you could say that like the kid already had within him not only the capacity to represent not only the monster but the class of all possible monsters and the fact that the problem wasn't monsters the problem was that monsters could continually be generated which is a way worse problem and then the answer to that isn't to kill an individual monster the answer to that is go to the source of the monstrous itself and defeat it so it's absolutely staggering and you could imagine that it would take a tremendous amount of meditate of effort for people to have come up with that solution over a very long period of time so now the point of the representation is to formulate a picture of what it is that's the threat so that you can then formulate a general purpose solution and so there's this image of Kali which I really like because Kelly is sort of the goddess of the darkness let's say in destruction and so Kelly is she has a headdress of fire her hair is on fire and she has a headdress of skulls and she has hands cut off all around her neck and she has a belt that's often snakes but it's sometimes she sometimes eating the intestines of this guy that she's just given birth to and that she's sitting on she has eight legs like a spider and she's in a web of fire and so she's a monster in some sense that represents everything that might terrify and devour you and the question is so you come up with that representation as an image to represent the class of all terrifying things and then you have to generate a solution in the face of that class and sacrifice is one of the solutions but that heroic encounter is another one of the solutions and that's the one that he catalyzed now he'd been read lots of books he'd watched lots of Disney movies you know and and he'd seen the heroic pattern portrayed many many places and his little brain was working like mad to extract out the essence of that and to embody it and when I asked him that question it just went snap and all those things lined up and his night terrors went away that was it and I followed up with his mom because it was really quite remarkable the whole set of occurrences you know and he didn't have night terrors that night even though he'd been having the nightly and that was the end of them because he'd solved his problem like he needed to be the courageous knight that went after the dragon and so that is what people need to be so I think when we go into solitude we shut off the external stimulation and we let the Dreaming part of our mind emerge and that's this nonverbal pattern detector that thinks in images and it's it's the thing that mediates between what we don't understand and what we do understand like if you understand it completely you can say it and you can act it out if you don't understand it you represent it in images and there it's like it's the emotion fear withdrawal paralysis and then that manifests itself in an image of what that might be and that image is the basis for the story and it's the basis for further development of the idea and to go into isolation is to let those images emerge and to dream a little bit and then that moves you that moves you ahead into the future. So, to use your language they use before, it's not enough just to map out the danger that is imminent in front of you, but all the potential dangers that you could come up with in abstract form. Remember what happens when God throws Adam and Eve out of out of paradise they become aware that they're going to die. The future becomes a problem, because you could say the future is the place of all potential monsters, right. And so just the monster that you have right in front of you, well you get rid of that, but that doesn't solve your problem, does it. The problem is how do you exist in a world full of monsters and part of that answer is you become a monster yourself. That's a big part of the answer, but it's an incomplete answer, because if you're just a monster then you're just as bad as the monsters. So, you have to be monstrous enough to contend with the monsters, but then you have to be civilized enough so that you're not a monster yourself. And that's more or less equivalent to the Jungian Integration of the Shadow.Thank You. Yep I came upon a paragraph in his chapter on scholars that really really bothered me and it actually bothers me to this day he talked about this kind of person like they were just a mirror-like they stretched he said every part of their skin basically to allow every new piece of information that they took on and that all they ever were was just an instrument they were just a mirror on reflecting what they had learned never actually having generated anything on their own and it's it's bothered me because I feel like in a way it's sort of like it's it's it's impacted my identity a lot because I don't know how are you supposed to create something, you know. Ok that's a really good question. I mean Nietzsche is often classed with the existentialists, right. And so one of the tenants of existentialist there's two real tenants of existentialism  there's more, but obviously we're oversimplifying, but one is that life is a problem. It isn't because there's something wrong with you, it's that life is a problem. And so, that's often contrasted with the Freudian view which is that if you have a problem it's because something went wrong during your development. The existentialist said no, no it's like life is a problem, make no mistake about it. And that the purpose of scholarship is in some sense to solve that problem. And so for Nietzsche, he said all truths are bloody truths to me. And what he meant by that was that if an idea didn't incarnate itself in you and transform your perceptions and your actions then you were merely possessed by the idea, you were merely a spokesperson for the idea. Or you could say that the idea possessed you, you're a puppet for the idea. It's not you, it's the idea is in you and it has you, you haven't taken the idea and incorporated with you and made it part of your life. And so there's a romanticism that's associated with that. That's the passionate scholar the person for whom ideas are not merely, what would you call, abstracted representations that can be tossed about as if they're commodities. They are more like personalities, that might be another way of thinking about it. And so if those ideas are compelling then you don't like one thing I learned a long time ago and I think this is probably relevant I know when I was a kid I like to argue and I like to win arguments or or or lose them although I like winning them a lot better but I didn't really mind so much what the content of the argument was you know I could engage in it like a sparring match and it was in some sense to establish dominance right to establish intellectual dominance I quit doing that when I was in my mid-20s because I thought that that was too shallow an approach to the ideas they they're not commodities of that sort they're there they have tendrils that reach down into the living that's the right way to think about it and so Nietzsche's criticism of scholars and he did this a lot was that they were bloodless you know they didn't they were full of performative contradictions that's another way of thinking about they'd say one thing and do another because their intellect was completely dissociated from their from their actions and Heath he he thought that was a very bad idea and I think that that's a good criticism I think it is a bad idea I also think it makes for an extraordinarily boring lecturer you know because you can tell if you're listening to someone whether the idea is that you're hearing are merely being passed through the person as if they're being memorized say or whether they're part of the dynamic core of the person and if they're part of the dynamic core of the person then they're almost always engaging and gripping and so he wasn't a fan of bloodless scholars and I think that's correct because one of the things that I see it's not a good idea to have ideas possess you unless you know what the ideas are up to and lots of people are possessed by ideas rather than possessing them and that what that means is they haven't taken the ideas and integrated them into their own being they haven't it's like an incarnation in a sense they haven't incarnated the ideas in an embodied form and and so they're incomplete when Zarathustra comes down the mountain he sees a bunch of people gathered around a famous individual I think maybe a scholar but doesn't really matter and when Zarathustra goes in looks at the person all he sees his little tiny midget with a gigantic ear and so he's a hyper specialist right and so he has a pretty impressive ear but he's only this big and that was Nietzsche's imagistic commentary on the danger of hyper specialization and also on the danger of adulation for hyperspecialization and and because he thought about it as a kind of deformity. now Nietzsche was a pretty harsh guy but but he did address the issue of the relationship between intellectual knowledge and and action because for Nietzsche those things are not to be separated in some sense so yeah so maybe I don't know why it maybe it bothered you like it's hard to say why it bothered you it might have bothered you because it's sort of undermined the idea of scholar but the other possibility and this isn't an accusation because obviously I don't know anything about you but it might also be that it struck a chord you know and that maybe you were doubtful or questioning how tightly associated your intellectual endeavor was with your actual character and your practice. So, that's another possibility I mean that's a really good thing to think about because generally speaking that integration is it is very much lacking people are a lot smarter and fluid with their ideas than they are ethical and consistent and characterized by integrity so yep. So last week you talked about how you hated people asking you if you believe in God or do you believe in miracles or you just like those questions elytis but you also talked about how and I want to put words in your mouth but I think you said something about the idea of an empirical evidence for religious experiences or spiritual experiences and I wonder how those two ideas can a spiritual existence or can a spiritual experience exist without God or  I had trouble reconsiling... Who knows. Who knows. You know I don't know what I don't know what to make of that I mean you could it depends on what you're willing to accept as proof I suppose that's where things get tricky you know if you have to demonstrate the existence of God objectively then subjective experiences of the transcendent are irrelevant right but and and that's a perfectly reasonable standpoint if your initial presupposition is the only thing that has actual existence is those things that can be demonstrated objectively and I'm not putting that down like that's a powerful methodology our technology is basically dependent on the acceptance at least a partial acceptance of those axioms but I also think that it's difficult for me to deny the existence of these patterns of thinking that seem to exist cross-culturally like the existence of the representation of the Dragon for example especially given that I can see an evolutionary rationale for the emergence of these representations so and then there's also the indisputable fact that religious experiences are accessible to people through a number of different avenues now and one of the things I mentioned when I discussed this before is well you could say well those are no different than experiences of psychopathology but they are different because the experiences of psychopathology damage people whereas the evidence is that the transcendent experiences actually help people so unless you can unless you're willing to say well there are some forms of psychopathological experience that actually facilitate health which is possibility but you know I think you're you're pushing your hypothesis at that point. Would it hurt to define what a religious experience is in the case then, because I'm not sure what you're saying about religious experience is what I'm understanding. Well generally a religious experience is something like an experience of the of the renewal of the world that might be one way of thinking about it so that everything sort of leaps forward as crystalline and perfect as if you had been viewing it from behind a mask before. Another would be a sense of the union of everything. And so you're a singular being and you're isolated and in the religious experiences.. Yeah, that's right. And I believe she had a left hemisphere stroke, if I remember correctly, and she was a sufficiently well-developed neuroscientist to understand what was happening as she had the stroke. And she had a intense religious experience as a consequence of that and she experienced it as a dissolution of the ego into this state of union with everything. And this transcendent experience of awe and the open well I don't remember the rest of it. I mean there are other elements of religious experience that are quite common; the idea of the opening of the heavens that's one, the communion with the ancestors that's another, the reduction of the body to a skeleton that's another movement up into heaven. These are well documented phenomena and a lot of them are associated, well a fair number of them, were associated with psychedelic use, but that's not the only Avenue to experiences like that. Epilepsy can produce experiences like that too. And then people usually report a near-death experience as well, you know people usually report that those experiences have life-altering significance. Now, that in and of itself only proves that people are capable of having subjective religious experiences, right. It doesn't definitively prove there's anything outside of that. for example most of the time he didn't talk about God he talked about the God image which is not the same thing because you could have a god image that was even evolutionarily instantiated without that necessarily being rep to any transcendent being beyond the image right so who knows who knows again I think it depends on what you're willing to accept as proof now the proof the it's beyond question that can people can have life-changing religious experiences another example of that is that the best treatment for alcoholism is religious conversion it's well documented in the literature and I studied alcoholism for a long time so one of the cures that sticks is religious conversion and the 12-step programs essentially attempt to instantiate religious conversion and it's hard to document their success because they succeed for the people who stick with it but that's not a very good measure right it's sort of it's sort of self-evident that they work for the people who stick with it I'm not cynical or anything but we don't have good data on on outcome but there is good data showing that religious transformation is a good cure for for alcoholism so and that's an interesting phenomena too it's too complicated I probably can't okay I'll try I'll try this for a second so here's how I think a religious conversion might work so imagine you've got the left hemisphere and it's the place where your habitual interpretations reside so I can give you a quick example of this so this guy who's a neurophysiologist or I think that's his field of study I think he's at UCLA he studied people who hadn't neglect and neglects is a very very bizarre phenomena. So, if you have a stroke that damages your right parietal lobe you'll lose the left part of your being not just your body it's really weird it's like so for example if you have a right parietal stroke and you look at a clock you only see you only only half the clock exists for you it's not like you only see half the clock it's weirder than that it's that there's only the right side of the clock there's only the right side of you there's only the right side of my body I don't know that this exists and so sometimes people with right parietal damage will wake up after the stroke and grab their left arm and throw it out of bed and or their leg and throw it out of bed because it's not theirs and then of course they fall out of bed which is quite a shock to them so and so now they'll only eat half the food on the plate nobody can really understand this phenomena logically right because we can't imagine what that must be like I think it must be like you know how you know there's things behind you but you don't not see them they're just not there it's not like it's black or anything or there's a space it's just not there and so I think what happens is the not there extends to three-quarters of the field instead of half the field that's a guess anyway so ramas now the funny thing about people with neglect is that if you tell them if you point it out you say well I noticed that you're not moving your left foot today they'll say well it's it's arthritic and I can't move it and say well why do you just try to move it so no look doctor I already told you it's in too much pain to move it was working fine this morning that can be months after the the accident so it's a denial and and people thought actually that that was trauma induced denial for a long time before they figured it out was actually a consequence of the neurophysiological damage you know Ramachandran found that if you irrigated the contralateral ear say now if you pour cold water in someone's ear it upsets their vestibular system and their eyes will move back and forth like this you can try that at a party if you want and anyways Ramachandran was testing vestibular function on these patients and he irrigated the right ear with cold water and they woke up and maybe what happened was that that was shocking enough so imagine the networks in the right hemisphere were degraded but not completely gone and they needed a really high threshold of activation to snap into function so here's an example of that if you have Parkinson's disease imagine you're frozen there okay and I throw a ball at you you'll go like this and catch it but you can't throw it back so you can the stimulus is enough that's enough to push you past threshold but you can't do it voluntarily now if you have Parkinson's like right to the tenth degree you won't even be able to couch it but there's a stage where you could still do that there's a great case study where this grandpa was in a wheelchair he had Parkinson's and his young grandson was playing out on the dock and fell in the water and started to drown and he got out of his wheelchair went into the ocean rescued him brought him onto the beach sat back down in his wheelchair and was paralyzed together so that was enough so you can imagine there was enough network left so if the emotional tension became high enough that the degraded circuits could still function so okay so back to Ramachandran so you irrigate the ear all of a sudden the right hemisphere connections flash the remainders managed to connect and the person goes oh my god I've had a terrible stroke I've lost the left side of my body they're crying they're like completely catastrophic aliy overwhelmed by it and then 20 minutes later the the effects wear off and they snap back in and now they they've lost their left side again they don't remember it and so what seems to happen is that the right hemisphere is collecting anomalous information that's what it does that's what it does when you're dreaming it's it's it's it's representing that anomalous information in image form and sort of slowly passing it to the left hemisphere so it doesn't overwhelm it and maybe if it gets overwhelming you wake up and you're afraid and you tell someone about the dream that helps you figure out what it was but anyways so that the right hemisphere is always trying to tap the left hemisphere into transformation right so now imagine that that can happen a little bit or a lot so maybe you're just ignoring a little bit of anomalous information you just have some mildly frightening dreams or maybe you've just stacked up a whole bunch of things that you're ignoring and there's some major-league monsters that you haven't contended with maybe there's situations where the right hemisphere is stored up enough counter enough of a counter hypothesis let's say about how the world works out make making sense out of all those things that you've ignored that one day it just goes snap and you're a new personality and maybe the new personality isn't addicted so it's something like it's something like that I think. Joke. Good morning, citizen Peterson. I've prepared a real doozy for you here. Oh, good. It's a good thing you've got extra time to handle this one. I'd even say it's rehearsed a little bit, so it's gonna be ultra ineffective. Yeah, okay. Okay, now I understand that a lecture on the psychological significance of anything really is going to indubitably wander off into an anthropocentric worldview. But, as a practitioner of the hard sciences I wanted to dig a little bit deeper. So, I sought out I guess a religious interpretation of both creative freedom and I guess the very nature of time itself. And I found it, obviously  that's why I'm here. And if you think you have an anthropocentric worldview it's nothing compared to Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger. Now I like to think that this microphone here, the one that you keep muting out on me, this microphone is an object which exists outside of our individual perceptions. That's just the way I like to look at it. But then I think about the concept: beauty is in the eye of the beholder. And certainly I mean, when you're talking about are the appreciation of art there has to be some sort of subjective element integrated into that. But, there also must be a limit as well. I mean, certain works of art do we appreciate as absolute masterpieces like Michelangelo's pietà, for example. Which you bring up frequently, because it really is that good. But there's other things which are just, by comparison, they're like vandalism. Now there's always a temptation to invoke the principle of a non-overlapping magisteria, but that seems like sort of a cop out, right. So, I formulated, I guess for myself, four standards of measure which help me separate what's the difference between art and mediocrity. And here's the four: Number one, education. Number two, time commitment. You got to put in the time if you're an artist. It's probably gonna become your full-time occupation. It's that you have to be that passionate about it. Number three, public display. Art isn't something that you own for yourself, you hide it in your basement, then it's not art. It's something that you have to express. you know. Something which you've got to share. And number four, and I think this is the most important one, efficacy of vision. If you're an artist, you've got to have a vision. And we talked about the dream state here a lot; you go into the dream state, you have inspiration. But it's not enough to just have the inspiration, because that's totally subjective for you. The art, the art part about it is having the techniques and the skill and the intent and I guess the capacity to turn that into something real, that you can then express or share. So, can you read Cardinal Ratzinger's explanation for the nature of time and then address the concept of beauty in the eye of the beholder with specific reference to the body positivity movement. How ...Jesus. I don't think I can. I think that you you tangled together so many things and this is also a tangle of things not that that's a criticism that I can't pull them all together with sufficient rapidity not to bore the audience to death. So, I'm gonna wait. Dr. Peterson, I'm fascinated by the idea of faith what faith means Jacob listens to a voice and believes it he probably heard other voices why did he believe this one. why what there must have been an a priori sort of functional necessity for him to believe the voice that told him one thing or another and and I think that that's a string that runs through the Bible and then through the New Testament we are expected as well I confess I'm a Christian I'm I act like I believe God is real and and so there is this call of faith and also the in in every hero's story we we see now there is always a moment in that story where the hero must believe something beyond the evidence that is before them which is to say they must take a leap of faith so I'm wondering if you can just kind of unpack that experience of faith and the understanding of how a human being makes the choice to believe one thing or another. apart and he said well it isn't so obvious that there's an eye, first of all. That it's a unity, like a unity transparent unto itself, which of course the psychoanalysts picked up in a big way. And then he wasn't sure that it was the eye who thought in some causal manner. He said, it's something like thoughts appear in the phenomenal field and maybe you choose between them or maybe they possess you. Like, there's lots of other ways of thinking about it. It isn't exactly obvious to me why we choose to take one pathway rather than another when so many of them offer themselves to us. you know. People tend to talk about that as something like conscience, right. It's got to have something to do, I think. It's an endless regress, because you can always ask why any assumption became primary, but I'll put that aside for a moment. It seems to me to have something to do with your aims ,you know. That you're more likely to listen to a voice that is in keeping with your most fundamental aims. And then the question is where do your most fundamental aims come from? And from what I've been able to determine, and I'll speak psychologically again, is that to begin with you're a concatenation of rather primitive sub personalities, hungry ones, tired one's, upset ones, laughing ones. You can see that in babies, you know. They cycle through those states very rapidly. There's a infantile unity above all that, but it doesn't have control, right. And so then the developing individual has to figure out how to integrate those primitive sub personalities into a unified personality. At the same time, they integrate the unified personality into a social unity. So it's partly individual integration, but it's fed by social forces. I mean even when you watch an infant breastfeed, its established a relationship with its mother and there's a reciprocity that's already at play there. So then, that underlying multiplicity starts to form itself into a unity. And that's something like the emergence of the individual out of the the Titans. That's a reasonable way of thinking about it. Like a sovereign out of the Titans, it's something like that. But then there's another division which seems to me to parallel the Cain and Abel division. It's that integration can be oriented towards something that's positive, but it can also be oriented towards something that's negative. And that's the split of the world into good and evil, I think. And then it looks like you're navigating between those and I can only account for that with something like choice. Like I think the free choice, even though I don't understand it I'm unwilling to deny the existence of free choice merely because I don't understand it. Because it looks to me like that's how people act, that's how they expect to be treated. And that societies that structure themselves in accordance with the idea that people have free choice, actually work. Now that doesn't prove that there's free choice, but people have been arguing about that forever. But, it looks to me so those are two possible means of integration. And then I think what you're doing is feeding one or the other, constantly. And I think you probably choose which one to feed. I think. It feels that way to me as well. You know maybe you're really aggravated with something. Maybe you're aggravated with your wife, or your child, or something like that. And you're feeling kind of nasty. And maybe even know that you're in the wrong. And an idea comes into your head. You think, "I could say that" and you know you could say it and you know what it would do, but then you pause and you think "would that make it better or worse". And then maybe you go "to hell with it", which is quite the thing to say. I've got a little story about that in a minute. And then you say it but you knew that you took the low road, right. And you know it and then you're guilty about that and defensive and that makes the fight way worse because then there's no damn way you're gonna admit that you actually did that. and so things do go to hell and so so here's here's an ugly little idea so that's that's that's relevant to the question so imagine you're playing around with cocaine now I'm using cocaine because it's very addictive but it's a very interesting chemical because it's a dopaminergic agonist and what what dopamine does is two things it makes you feel like what you're doing is worthwhile but it also imagined that there's a bunch of neural circuits that are active and then they get a hit of dopamine or you do then those neural circuits get a little bit more powerful okay so it it has a rewarding property which is that it makes you feel like what you're doing is important and it has a reinforcing property which is it makes neural circuits grow so now what that means is that whatever you were doing just before you took cocaine grows okay so now imagine there's a bunch of different things that you do just before you take cocaine but there's a string of decisions and at one decision point is the same for all of those difference occurrences and that decision point is because you know you're in trouble and that decision point is well to hell with it okay so then you think that each of the 200 times that you take cocaine even though you do it in different places but that one thought is there all the time and that thing grows because you're reinforcing it and it grows and it grows and it grows and so now that's in you let's that's part of you and it's the thing that says to hell with it okay so now and maybe that's not such a good thing to grow inside your brain so then you your idea and they take you to a cocaine treatment center and after a week you're no longer physically physiologically addicted you're not craving you don't have a problem as long as you're there but then they take you back to your normal environment and you see like cocaine Joe your friend and as soon as you see him up that thing comes and bang you're back on the you're back on the to hell with the track and that's well you're in well you're where you will end up - if you reinforce that particular perspective long enough so that's akin in a sense to the this decision-making process you know if you if you take the low road then that wins and it gets a little stronger because everything that wins neurologically gets a little stronger it's like a Darwinian competition so one rule is don't practice what you don't want to become because you really do become that it builds it builds itself right into your neural architecture and that's one of the terrifying things about addiction you know because you think well it's kind of psychological it's like yeah kind of it's also kind of neuro physiological and you build a one-eyed cocaine monster in your head if you hit yourself enough with something that reinforcing. so yeah. Last question, I guess. Hallelujah. it's just a really simple question then about I'm not sure how to take that.. So when it one of the things that was noticing from the stories of Jacob and a lot of these biblical narratives is you do have this all-powerful God who is able to kind of essentially be the hidden protagonist in the narrative but then the funny thing is that he's kind of revealing some of his qualities throughout the course of the story so you were talking about the weird paradox of the fact that God somehow allows Jacob Israel to win the fight. He does that with Abraham too. Yeah. so my question is relating to Pancept's thing about the rats that you told like three or four times and the number of occasions I saw one even more recent videos you talked about it where the bigger rat lets the smaller rat win because then the other the smaller rat won't engage in the game so the question is is twofold for me one is God allowing humanity to win periodically so that's to allow us to actually engage in the dialogue through these stories and to is it a much more primitive version of the virtue of humility which you wouldn't normally characterize of an omnipotent deity. Well, those are excellent questions. I really like the second one in particular, that God's decision to allow human victory from time to time is actually a manifestation of something approximating humility or at least mercy but humility is an interesting take on it. Well, it's also connected to Paul's image of how Christ handed him hands himself over and allows himself to be defeated by men and therefore conquers sin which is man's enemy it's a weird  it's the same paradox where God enters into that dynamic with people and willingly loses. Yeah. Well, the first thing I would say is that that's a really interesting analogy. It's complicated enough question that I don't think I can formulate it any better than you already did. Like, it's an interesting string of ideas. I'd have to play with it a while to see  it does shed an interesting light on why God is amenable to negotiation in the Old Testament. Which is really a strange thing, as you pointed out. It's like, this is omnipotent God, who obviously can do whatever he wants, and yet he can be bargained with. And that also And that also opens up the question of why, like your hypothesis is. Well, if you don't let the little rat win now and then, then they get dejected and quit playing, and that's a pretty good observation. If people don't get to win, now and then, you know they that's kind of what happens to Cain. God says, "well you're not playing a straight game, that's why you're not winning". There's an intimation in the Old Testament, and I think it's more developed in the New Testament  maybe not, that the straighter the game you play the more likely you are to win. And so And so maybe part of the reason that God lets Abraham bargain, and even Jacob, is because they've started to play very straight games. And so maybe you do win in your wrestling with God if you play a straight game. I mean I actually think that's the reason that's true, is because that's actually why we would define it as a straight game. Now, then we could speak psychologically again. I think that what we've come to recognize as a straight game is the game that, in the broadest number of situations across the widest range of time spans, is most likely to produce a positive outcome. And that's actually the grounds for our sense of ethics, it's really practical., where God sets himself up as the benevolent antagonist so as to accelerate the game. Yeah, well I think that's a really interesting idea. I mean there is hints, I would say, throughout the biblical story that the reason that God tolerates Satan, let's say, is because without an adversary you're soft. And that's tied in with the notion that life is something like a moral struggle, you know. That's the fundamental essence of being a moral struggle. Now, I think that that's phenomenologically a reasonable observation. Maybe other people don't experience it that way, but it seems to me like within my own experience that that's accurate. Now, I don't know what that says about the fundamental nature of reality, but I had a vision at one point that I was in a ring with Satan, actually. Believe it or not. And it was like a Roman Colosseum and I was rather upset to find myself there but I won. And I asked God afterwards why he would do such a thing and his answer was he knew I could win. And that's interesting you know, because I don't know what to make of that. Believe me. I have no idea what to make of that, but the idea was that if you're trying to encourage someone  rather than protect them, because those are really different things, right. To protect someone isn't to make them strong to encourage them is to make them strong then you set them a series of challenges right at the point where they may win. And maybe you could make a case that that's what you do if you really care for someone. I'm not saying that that interpretation is correct. You definitely, with your children, you know when you're wrestling with them,say, when you're playing with them you push them to the limit of their ability, because otherwise they don't transcend their current abilities. that's a hell of a welcome for someone  who's gonna talk about the Bible so I  thought I would get farther than through  Genesis by by this point but I'm not  unhappy about the pace either I've  learned a tremendous amount and so  hopefully what we'll do today is finish  Genesis completely and then I think I'll  try to start up with Exodus in May  depending on what happens next year I  have a busy travel schedule and but I  would really like to do it I really like  the Exodus story and I understand it  very well a lot of the stories in  Genesis especially after the first few  stories say up to the Tower of Babel I  had to do a tremendous amount of  learning about which is really good but  I do know the Exodus story so I'm really  looking forward to that so so let's dive  right into it and see how far we can get  today so we'll review first so Joseph's  father is Jacob and Jacob is the  patriarch of Israel essentially that the  father of the twelve tribes and we might  remember that he had a very morally  ambivalent pathway through life and it's  one of the things that I think so  interesting about the stories in the in  the Old Testament is that these so  called patriarchal figures are very  realistic and it's something that I was  also being struck by that accounts in  the New Testament that way there's lots  of things that Christ does that you'd  think would have been edited out over  time and sanitized but they're not and  that the Old Testament is definitely not  a book that's been sanitized and that's  it  quite interesting that that's the case  so you sort of see people with all their  flaws and I've been trying to also  derive some general conclusions about  them the moral of the story of the  Genesis stories and because these  stories are fundamentally moral and  moral as far as I'm concerned has to do  with action right because moral  decisions are the decisions that you  make when you're structuring action when  you decide to do one thing or another  generally you want to do things that are  the best things that you can think of to  do and hence good but sometimes you also  want to do things that are they're worse  things you can do you know because  you're angry or resentful or bitter and  so the moral decisions that you make  that govern your actions are really the  most important decisions that you make  in your life and it's not that easy to  figure out how to make moral decisions  we don't have an unerring technology for  that the same way as we do for say  making decisions about empirical reality  which in some ways seem a lot simpler  partly because we can work collectively  at it partly because we have a rigorous  methodology for deciding what's true and  what's not so one of the things that's  really struck me like it's an  overarching theme I would say that the  emerges out of Genesis especially after  the really ancient stories say  especially after the stories of Cain and  Abel and Noah and the Tower of Babel  when you get to the accounts of the  historically or historically real people  one injunction seems to be get the hell  out there and do something you know one  of the major themes for all of the  patriarchs that we've talked about  Abraham say Jacob and Joseph is move out  into the world regardless of the  circumstances at hand now that's in in  in the Old Testament stories that's  basically portrayed as harkening to the  voice of God something like that maybe  you could think about  his destiny or a psychological calling  and the funny thing too is is that it's  not that these people have an easy time  of it when they heed that call so what's  what's fascinating is that they often  run into extreme difficulties right away  and I think that's very interesting  first of all because life is obviously  full of extreme difficulties and second  it's another example of the failure to  sugarcoat things which is one of the  things I think makes a mockery of anti  religious theories that are even quite  sophisticated say like Freud's because  Freud thought of religion as a and it  was a wish fulfillment essentially and  and also Marx who thought about religion  as the opiate of the masses it's if  those were true it seems to me that  there'd be a lot more wish and a lot  less reality a lot less stark harsh  reality you know in the first thing that  Abraham encounters is a famine and then  he has to hide his wife and then he he  basically journeys into a tyranny so  that's about as bad as it gets in some  ways and those themes recur continually  and no one ever lives where they're  supposed to live they'll even live in  Canaan and not the promised land and so  it's a pretty rough it's a pretty rough  series of stories but the fundamental  idea is something like there's no time  for sitting around there's time to go  out into the world and engage and then  there's there's hints about the proper  and improper ways of engaging right so  clearly the improper way to engage is I  think most clearly delineated in the  Cain and Abel story and with Cain  exemplifying the inappropriate way to  engage with the world and that's to  engage with the world in a bitter  jealous and resentful manner now one of  the things that I really like about the  Cain and Abel story and that theme  recurs continually with the with the  duality of the brothers right there's  there's constant conflict between a  perspective that's essentially like  Cain's and and the and the opposite  perspective which all which I'll get to  in a minute  but Caine sees that the world is a very  tragic place and that the rewards are  distributed unfairly and that there are  people who do better and people who do  worse and as a consequence of that he  becomes bitter and resentful and curses  God and then he becomes homicidal  fratricidal which is even worse than he  destroys his own ideal then his  descendants basically become genocide or  something like that so that seems to be  the wrong way to go about things you  know unless your goal is to make things  worse like it's not like it has a  limited number of things has nothing to  object to he's got plenty to object to  his situation actually is bad he's  overshadowed terribly by his brother who  everyone loves who does extraordinarily  well and who's good at everything and  the story is a bit of nivel inton for  Keynes failure although a fair bit of  its laid at his own feet  but he's definitely failing and so you  can understand why he would have this  terrible attitude  but the problem is all it does is make  it worse so it doesn't seem to be one of  the things I've also learned as a  psychologist sort of pondering these  sorts of things it's often a lot easier  to identify what you shouldn't do than  what you should do like it's I think  evil is easier to identify than good I  think good is trickier but evil stands  out to some degree and then at least you  can say if you're trying to get as far  away from that as possible we could even  say just for practical reasons so your  life doesn't become hell and your family  life doesn't become hell at least you  could get as far away from that as  possible even if you weren't able to  conjure up what would constitute the  good as a name you could at least avoid  those sorts of pitfalls and I do also  think that its pitfalls like that that  really threaten our society right now  you know that I see a tremendous rise in  resentment fueling almost all of the  political polarization that's taking  place and seems unfortunate given that  by and by large everyone on the planet  is richer than they've ever been  now that doesn't mean there's no  disparity there's but there's always  disparity anyways Jacob of course Jacob  on  see so and so the and Jacob ends up with  with with Isaac's blessing and so that's  that's a moral catastrophe and then he  has to run because his brother wants to  kill him  and so that's the fratricidal motif  again I like that too I think that's  real really realistic you know one of  the things that Freud noted constantly  and this is where Freud really is a  genius is that the most intense hatreds  and also sometimes the most intense love  is within families you know and in the  Freudian world of psychopathology it's  all it's all inside the family and in  fact the pathology in the Freudian world  is actually the fact that it's all  inside the family because people who get  tangled up in the Freudian familial  nightmare which is roughly eatable in  structure can only conceptualize the  world in terms of their familial  relationships they've been so damaged by  the enmeshment and the trauma and the  deceit and the betrayal and the blurred  lines and all of that that they just  can't expand past the family and go out  in the world so the idea that brothers  can be at each other's throats I think  is that's a very powerful idea and it's  not something that people like to think  about so so Jacob has to leave and it's  not surprising because I mean what he  did was pretty reprehensible he betrayed  his brother but nonetheless he's the  person who dreams of the ladder that  unites heaven and earth and that's a  very perverse thing you know what but  one of the things I think it does is  give in some sense it gives hope to  everyone because it isn't you know if  only the good guys win we're really in  trouble right because it's not that easy  to be a good guy it's it's it's really  not that easy and most people are pretty  keenly aware of all the ways that they  fall short even of their own ideals and  so if there was no hope except for the  good guys almost all of us would be lost  and so that's one of the things I really  liked and was more surprised about with  the Old Testament stories is that these  people are a very complex  and they make very major moral errors by  anyone's standard and yet if and yet the  overall message is still hopeful and the  the message that runs contrary to the  message of evil say that message of good  is something like well there's a lot of  emphasis on faith right and the that's a  tough one because cynics people who are  cynical about religious structures like  to think of faith as the willingness to  demolish your intellect in the service  of superstition and well there's there's  something to be said for that  perspective but not a lot because the  reality is much more sophisticated part  of the faith that's that that is being  insisted upon in the old testament is  something like and I'm speaking  psychologically here again that it's  useful to pause it a high high good and  to aim at it so and I really think  that's practically useful to the  research we've done with the Future  authoring program for example indicates  pretty clearly that if you get people to  conceptualize an ideal and a balanced  ideal you know so what do you want for  your family what do you want for your  career what do you want for your  education what do you want for your  character development how are you going  to use your time outside of work how are  you going to structure your use of drugs  and alcohol in places where you might  get impulsive how can you avoid falling  into a horrible pit if you really think  that through and you come up with an  integrated ideal and you you put it  above you as something to reach for  then you're more committed to the world  in a positive way and you're less  tormented by anxiety and uncertainty and  so and that makes sense right because  here you are alive and everything and so  unless you were capable if you're not  capable of manifesting some positive  relationship with the fact of your being  then how could that be anything other  than hellish because you it would just  be anxiety provoking and terrible  because you're vulnerable and there'd be  nothing useful or worthwhile to do well  that's just not I just can't see that as  a winning strategy for anyone you can  make a rational case for adopting that  strategy in that you know you can say  well there's no evidence for for a  transcendent morality or for an ultimate  meaning there's no hard empirical  evidence but it seems to me that there's  existential evidence as well that has to  be taken into account  and of course psych psychologists have  talked about this a lot Carl Rogers for  example in Hume for that matter Freud  for that matter most of the great  psychologists have pointed out that you  know you can derive reasonable  information that's that's solid from  your own experience especially if you  also talk to other people and you can  kind of see in your own life when you're  on a productive path that sort of in  Nobles and enlightens you or a  destructive path and I think it's kind  of useful to think that maybe the  dichotomy between those two paths might  be real you know and and because that  also allows you to give credence to your  intuitions about that sort of thing but  I don't anyways I don't think it's  unreasonable to posit that since you're  alive adopting the highest possible  regard for the fact that you're alive  and that you're surrounded by other  creatures that are alive I just can't  see how that can possibly be construed  as a losing strategy and so that's the  first thing so that's something like  faith right it's faith it's not it's not  only faith in your being but it's faith  in being as such and the faith would be  something like if you could orient your  being properly then maybe that would  orient you with being as such and you  never know like I mean it might be true  there's no reason to assume that it  wouldn't be true I mean even if you just  take a strict biological perspective on  this and think about us as the product  of three and a half billion years of  evolution I mean we have struggled over  all those billions of years to be alive  and to match ourselves with reality and  so because one of the things I've often  wondered is you know life is definitely  difficult there's no doubt about that  and that's unfair and there's inequality  and all of those things and people are  subject to all sorts of terrible things  but I also wonder if you weren't  actively striving to make things  worse just how much better could they be  you know because people are very they  like houses that are divided amongst  themselves they're pointing in six  different directions at the same time  they're working at cross-purposes to  themselves because of bitterness or  began and resentment and on what  unprocessed memories and childhood  hatreds and unexamined assumptions all  sorts of things and you you just gotta  wonder if you could push that aside and  or int yourself properly and then the  other thing that of course is stressed  very heavily in the Old Testament and of  course that goes through the entire  biblical corpus is that it's not only  enough to establish a positive  relationship with being which I think is  the essential it's a good description of  faith you have to make that decision  right because being is very ambivalent  and you can make the case that maybe  it's something that should have never  happened  but that doesn't seem to be productive  to me and faith seems to be I'm going to  act as if being is ultimately  justifiable and that if I partake in it  properly I will improve it rather than  making it worse so I think that's the  statement of faith and then what seems  to go along with that is something like  truth in conception and action you know  even people like Jacob who are pretty  damn morally ambivalent to begin with  get hammered a lot by what they go  through and what seems to happen is that  they're hammered into some sort of  ethical shape right so by the mid point  of their life's journey there are people  who are solidly planted who you can  trust and who don't betray being or  themselves or their fellow man and so  it's an interesting I mean it seems  reasonable to me to first assume that  you have to establish a relationship  with something that's transcendent it  might even be just the future version of  you but and then second that you have to  align yourself with reality in a  truthful manner and that that's your  best bet  and  the biblical stories are actually quite  realistic about that too because they  don't really say that if you do that  you're going to be instantly transported  to the promised land  like even Moses as we'll find out in the  Exodus stories he never makes it to the  Promised Land and so it's not like  you're offered instantaneous final  Redemption if you move out forthrightly  into the world establish a faithful  relationship with being an attempt to  conduct yourself with integrity but it's  your best bet and it might be good  enough and even if it's not good enough  it's really preferable to the  alternative which seems to be something  closely akin to hell both personal and  social so Joseph's father is Jacob later  Israel he who wrestles with God and  we've talked about that a little bit  it's sort of implicit and what I've been  saying is that I think we all do that to  some degree we wrestle with reality  itself that's for sure not only the  reality we understand but the reality we  don't understand which is sort of a  transcendent reality and then maybe  whatever reality is outside of that you  know because the classic judeo-christian  conception of God is that there's time  and space and of course there's lots of  things about what exists in time and  space that we're completely ignorant of  and that's transcendent in that sense  but then there's an idea that there's a  realm outside of that which is a well  it's an interesting idea it's a very  sophisticated idea I think rather than a  simple idea it's it's difficult to know  what to make of it but it doesn't really  matter because I think regardless of  what your attitude is towards those  sorts of things intellectually you still  end up in the same position as Jacob for  all intents and purposes practically  speaking because I don't think that  there's anyone who at some point in  their life or perhaps even everyday  doesn't at some level wrestle with God  and you could just call it well the  nature of reality I suppose if you want  to be say reductionistic about it but I  don't think it makes any difference it's  still something you're stuck with and  it's not only the nature of reality  itself that you  have to struggle with but it's also the  nature of your moral relationship to it  your behavioral relationship to it so  that's how you should perceive it and  how you should conduct yourself and then  whether or not the the advantages of  doing it properly are worth the  difficulty and the disadvantages so that  seems to me just a straight existential  statement then you know Jacob gets  damaged by his wrestling which is also  very realistic so anyways he also ends  up his father of Joseph who's the  favorite son son who's born in his old  age to his favorite wife and that's who  we're gonna talk about to you today so  you remember so Jacob is the forefather  of the twelve tribes of Israel and  there's his his wives and this son and  the offspring that resulted those are  all the sons there's a daughter named  Dinah as well and rachel is the woman he  really loved and the first son he had  with Rachel was Joseph and that was when  he was older and so that's in some sense  why Joseph is his favorite so this is  the beginning of the story of Joseph now  Israel Jacob loved Joseph more than all  his children because he was the son of  his old age and he made him a coat of  many colors and there's a lot packed  into those two sentences you know the  first is that now Israel loved Joseph  more than all his other children that's  probably not so good one of the things  we've seen in the stories that have  preceded this is that whenever there's  marked preference on the part of parents  for one child over the other and in with  with with with Jacob and Esau it was  Rachel was Jacob was Rachel's favorite  and ISA was Isaac's fav  that didn't work out so well that put a  real twist in the entire structure of  the family and so there's a warning  there right off the bat you might say  well you can't help having a preference  for one child or for another but I don't  know if that's true and it's certainly  something that you should be very  cautious about because it doesn't seem  to work out very well because he was the  son of his old age fair enough and he  made him a coat of many colors that's a  very interesting image that coat of many  colors that that idea and so I'm gonna  delve into that idea because it sets the  stage like it says what sort of person  Joseph is he's favored he's younger he's  favored but he also has this particular  garment that characterizes him you know  and one of the things I've really  learned from analyzing women's dreams in  particular is that women very frequently  in my experience very frequently dream  of clothing as a role and so if you're  interpreting women's dreams then if they  put on the shoes of their grandmother  for example then you understand very  rapidly that the dream is trying to make  an association between their own  behavior and something that's  characteristic of either the state of  being a grandmother or the particular  grandmother and it makes sense right  because clothing protects but it also  signifies a role and it's interesting in  in the Old Testament stories often if  someone is going to act deceitfully they  change their they change their outfit  and that's kind of what you do when you  act deceitfully right you dress up like  someone else you present yourself like  someone else so anyways back to the coat  of many colors well for something to be  many colored it sort of spans the entire  gamut of possibility and so there's a  hint there that if you want to be a  full-fledged person that you have to  manifest a very large number of traits  and so I want to go into that idea a bit  the first thing I want to talk about is  some of the things that we've learned  about what happens to you when you go to  a new environment now there's this idea  in very deep idea in clinical psychology  a fundamental idea which is that if  someone's a  just about something what you do is you  and it's getting in their way you take  what they're anxious about and you  define it because that already delimits  it right because one of the problems  with being anxious about something is  you won't speak of it  it's like Voldemort and then if you  don't speak of it you it's way bigger  than it should be as soon as you start  talking about it you cut it down to size  and so and it it's for a bunch of  reasons it's because you're not as  afraid you're not as afraid of as many  things as you think and you're braver  than you know and more and more capable  so as soon as you're brave enough to  start talking about what you're afraid  of then you see that there's more to you  than you thought and that there's less  to the problem than you thought and then  you can decompose it further into  smaller problems and then you can figure  out how to approach those smaller  problems and so and then it doesn't seem  to me to be that you get less frightened  it seems to be that you get more  courageous which is way better than  being less frightened because there's  lots of things to be frightened about so  if you're courageous that that really  does the trick now the question is what  happens if you like let's say that  you're very socially inept and you don't  know how to introduce yourself or to  make any establish the initial parts of  a relationship with anyone and so then  you start putting yourself in situations  where you're required to do that and so  then the question is how is it  technically that you transform you say  well you learn well we want to be more  specific about that what does it mean  that you learned well if you're dealing  with someone who's particularly socially  inept and you're doing psychotherapy  with them you might teach them how to  shake someone's hand properly and say  their name and remember the other  person's name and so you just practice  that with them so that they have the  motoric routine down so that form of  knowledge is built right into your body  it's like look at the person put out  your hand shake it don't not like a dead  halibut but you know with a reasonable  grip say your name don't mumble it look  look at them so that they can hear you  and then when they say their name try to  remember it and that's then so you can  practice that with people and so then  they develop something that's motoric  right it's embedded right in their body  and so and then you can say to them well  the other thing you can do is when you  start a conversation is  don't sit there thinking about what  you're gonna say next because then you  won't be paying attention to the person  and you'll make a fool out of yourself  because you'll manifest non sequiturs  right because you'll get out it's like  if you're dancing and all you're paying  attention to is where your feet are and  you're gonna step on the other person  all the time so you want to pay  attention to the other person and then  whatever automatized social knowledge  you have will come to the forefront so  it's a good thing to know if you're  socially anxious right if you're  socially anxious one of the things you  should do is pay way more attention to  the person you're talking to rather than  less and you should pay as little  attention as possible to yourself so if  you feel yourself falling in because  you're anxious then what you do is you  push your attention out and pay  attention to the person because to the  degree that you've been socialized then  all your automatic responses will kick  in so but anyway so you go out into the  social world and you learn to shake  someone's hand and you learn how to  listen to them and ask them questions  because that's the next thing because  people love you can't just ask them  random questions obviously but if they  start talking to you and you don't  understand something about what they're  saying or maybe something they said is  interesting and you ask them a question  they're pretty damn happy about that  because it means you're actually paying  attention to them and people actually  love to be paid attention to because it  hardly ever happens so they really  really like it and so okay so so what's  happening well first of all your  mastering them automated motor movements  right where to point your eyes where to  put your hands how to move your lips  like really embodied knowledge it's a  special kind of memory and you're  practicing them so that's building new  skills for you and then by listening to  the person and watching yourself  interact you're also generating new new  abstract information that enables you to  conceptualize the world in a different  way so if you go out to ten you go out  and talk to ten different people or 50  different people then you get to listen  to what those 50 people said you get to  watch how they're how they express  themselves and you gather a corpus of  knowledge that changes the way you  perceive that broadens you as a social  agent okay so that's two forms of  knowledge but then there's a third one  which is real  interesting which is that you know you  have a lot of biological potential and  it's hard to know what potential is but  part of it is that you're capable of  generating proteins that you haven't  been generating so you should get right  on that by the way so but what the way  that works in part is that if you put  yourself in a radically new situation  then your brain that there are genetic  switches that turn on because of the  demands of the new situation that code  for new proteins so it's as if you have  latent software that would be one way of  thinking about that will only be turned  on if you go into the situation where  that's necessary and so then you might  think well if that's the case how much  of you could be turned on if you went a  whole bunch of different places and  that's a really really that's a profound  question because one of the deep answers  to how you should get your life together  is you should go a very large number of  places and turn yourself on and I want  to walk through that a little bit  because there's a very rich symbolic  world that expresses that so now the  idea about having a coat of many colors  would be that the person who is the  appropriate leader because remember or  the proper person which would be the  same thing one of the things that these  old stories are trying to express and to  figure out is how is it that you should  act which is the same as what  constitutes the ideal those are the same  question and the hand here with Joseph  is well you should wear a coat of many  colors which means that you should be  able to go have a drink in the pub with  the guys who are you know drywalling  your your house and you should be able  to have a sophisticated conversation  with someone who's more educated in an  abstract way and that maybe you should  be equally comfortable in both  situations right because you might think  well there's more one of the indications  that there's more to you is that you can  be put more places and function properly  and that would be a good thing to aim at  because here's the other issue is that  you know perfectly well that the fun  the mental tragedies of life and your  exposure to malevolence in the course of  that life so those being the worst  things there's not a lot you can do to  to alter that fundamentally because  their conditions of existence you're  going to be subject to your  vulnerability and you're going to be  subject to malevolence that's that and  you can't hide from it because it  actually makes it worse so you're stuck  with it so then the question is well  what are your options and one option is  to curse the structure of being for  being malevolent and tragic and fair  enough and now there is to make yourself  so damn differentiated and dynamic and  able that you're more than a match for  that now that's not an easy thing but  doesn't matter because like what what's  the alternative  there's no good alternative and that's  also worth knowing so you see these  ideas expressed in the strangest places  and so we've talked a little bit I think  in this video series about Pinocchio but  if we haven't it doesn't matter  you see there's Jiminy Cricket at the  opening of the Pinocchio movie pointing  to a star which is roughly the nativity  star for all intents and purposes and  it's a it's a symbolic indicator of  something Dimond like and pure right  glimmering in the darkness that's  transcendent and above the horizon upon  which to fix your eyes and so that's the  thing is you need that technically and  the reason you need that is because we  know enough about psychology now to know  that almost all of the positive emotion  that you're going to experience in your  life and positive emotion is analgesic  by the way right it actually quells pain  so it's not just positive it also gets  rid of negative which is a big plus  almost all the positive emotion that  you're going to feel you're going to  feel in relationship to a goal because  you feel positive emotion as you  approach a goal and so if you want to  feel positive emotion then you need a  goal and then you might think well if  you want to maximize that positive  emotion which is enthusiasm and also  what pulls you out into the world as  well as feeling good then you need the  possible goal well not because that's  gonna engage the largest segments of  your being like if your goal is too  narrow then a bunch of you isn't gonna  be on board for it you know if the goal  is well-developed and multifaceted then  all of you can partake in that even your  negative elements even your anger and  and your fear can get on board with that  let's say so you need a goal man that's  worthy you've got us thank you good you  need a goal that justifies the tragedy  and malevolence of life that seems to be  the bottom line now maybe you think well  there's no goal that can do that it's  like well there are still better and  worse goals so and I'm not convinced  that there are no goals that can do that  I think that's an open question you'd  never know that until you pursued the  proper goal long enough to find out who  you would be as a consequence of  pursuing it so that's also your destiny  or your existential voyage right it's  also not something that anyone else can  do for you someone can say get your act  together for Christ's sake and get it  get get at it that's that'll make the  world unfold best for you but there's no  way you can know that without doing it  so and unless you think you've done a  particularly stellar job of that then  you have no reason to doubt its  potential validity so plus like crickets  are telling you this and so you know  they're a very reliable source okay so  you see the star the star recurs as a  motif in Pinocchio and one of the more  interesting elements of it here is that  when Geppetto wants to transform his  puppet the marionette who's being played  by forces that operate behind the scenes  which is a really good definition of the  persona from a union perspective right  and also something indicative of  something like an ideological or  conceptual possession Geppetto who's a  good guy is positive father figure Reid  lifts his even though he's a patriarchal  figure right and a very competent one he  still even lifts his eyes up to  something that transcends his mode of  being positive as it is and wishes that  his  creation would undertake the kind of  transformation that would make it  autonomous and fully functional as a  moral agent no strings right so that's  very interesting I think Solzhenitsyn  said the salvation of mankind lies only  in making everything the concern of all  that's a pretty decent star-like goal I  would say and so what happens in the  Pinocchio story is that because and I  think this is a symbolic representative  of what I just described you that  happens at a genetic level if you put  yourself in new situations so Geppetto  is roughly culture in the Pinocchio  story right he's he's a craftsman he's  he's a and and he makes Pinocchio so  he's he's who's his son he's the  socializing agent and he aims for  something above mere socialization which  is I think part of the mysterious  element of human beings you know in our  scientific models we basically have  socialization and biology but there's  always a third element in mythological  stories which is whatever you might  construe as the spontaneous action of  consciousness that's associated with  freewill and you know that's just  basically being conceptualized in  religious terms as something akin to the  soul now we don't have a category for  that scientifically because what we try  to do scientifically is to reduce  everything either to socialization or to  biology but it isn't clear to me that  that's it's perfectly reasonable from  the perspective of practicality at a  scientific level you don't want to  multiply explanatory principles beyond  necessity but there's many things that  that doesn't come to terms with such as  the fact that we all treat each other as  autonomous beings with freewill and that  that seems to work and that if we stop  doing that then things go to hell very  very rapidly so and the mere fact that  we have been able to conceptualize what  that conscious freewill might be  metaphysically or physically doesn't  mean it doesn't exist it just means that  we don't understand it I mean what it  was only in the last 15 years that we  discovered that 95 percent of the  universe was made out of some kind of  matter that we can't even  whose properties we can't even imagine  except that it seems to have mass so  anyways what happens is when Geppetto  reach lifts his eyes up to the star he  so it's society aligning itself with the  proper goal with regards to individual  development right so so the instead of  society being at odds with the  individual they line up and then what  happens is nature comes onboard and  that's the blue fairy in the in the  Pinocchio story and that seems to me to  be a symbolic representation of what  happens biologically when when you set  the goal properly get your culture  behind you and move into the world it's  that there's a biological transformation  that occurs as a consequence of that  which means that a bunch of you that  hasn't been turned on turns on and I  guess one question would be is what  would you be like if you turned on  everything inside of you that could be  turned on well that's a good goal that's  a good thing to find out so now I'm  going to introduce a couple of other  ideas so there's this idea in union  psychology called the circumambulation  and you only had this idea that you had  a potential future self which would be  in potential everything that you could  be and that it manifests itself moment  to moment in your present life by making  you interested in things and the things  that you're interested in are the things  that would guide you along the path that  would lead you to maximal development  now it sounds of like a metaphysical  idea or a or a mystical idea even but  but it's not it's it's not it's a really  profoundly biological idea the idea is  something like well you're set up so  that you're automatically interested in  those things that was fully expand you  as a well adapted creature well like  there's nothing radical about that idea  how else what else could possibly be the  case unless there's something  fundamentally flawed about you that is  what the the situation would be it's  kind of interesting to think about how  that would be manifest moment to moment  but the idea is something like well your  interest is captured by those things  that lead you down the path of  development  well that better be the case okay so  that's fine and so there's some utility  in pursuing those things that you're  interested in that's the call to  adventure let's say so and the call to  adventure takes you all sorts of places  now the problem with the call to  adventure is like what the hell do you  know you might be interested in things  that are kind of warped and bent and  often it's the case that when new parts  of people manifest themselves and grip  their interest say they do it very badly  and shoddily and so you stumble around  like an idiot when you try to do  something new that's where the fool is  the precursor to the savior from the  from the symbolic perspectives because  you have to be a fool before you can be  a master and if you're not willing to be  a fool then you can't be a master so so  you're gonna it's it's an error mmm  error ridden process and that's also  laid out in the Old Testament stories  because the first thing that happens to  all these patriarchal figures when God  kicks them out of their father's house  when they're like 84 is that they they  run into all sorts of trouble and some  of its social and some of its natural  and some of it's a consequence of their  own moral inadequacy so they're fools  and but but the thing that's so  interesting is that despite the fact  that they're fools they're still  supposed to go on the adventure and that  they're capable of learning enough as a  consequence of moving forward on the  adventure so that they straighten  themselves out across time and so it's  something like this so this  circumambulation that young talked about  was this continual will return to this  this continual circling in some sense of  who you could be you might notice for  example that there are themes in your  life you know when you go back across  your experiences you see you kind of  have your typical experience that sort  of repeats itself and there might be  variation on it like a musical theme but  it's it's like you're circling yourself  and getting closer to yourself as you  move across time  that's the circumambulation now you  remember that for a second as well go  back to it okay so imagine that  something glimmers before you it's an  interest that's dawning and you decide  well first of all you're paralyzed you  think well how do I know if I should  pursue that it's probably a stupid idea  and the proper response to that is  you're right it probably is a stupid  idea because almost all  all ideas are stupid and so the  probability that as you move forward on  your adventure that you're gonna get it  right the first time is zero it's just  not gonna happen  and so then you might think well maybe  I'll just wait around until I get the  right idea  and which people do right so they're  like 40 year old thirteen year olds  which is not a good idea so they wait  around until it's Waiting for Godot  until they finally got it right but the  problem is you're too stupid to know  when you've got it right so waiting  around isn't gonna help  because even if it the perfect  opportunity manifested itself to you in  your incomplete form the probability  that you would recognize it as the  perfect opportunity is zero you might  even think it's the worst possible idea  that you've ever heard of anywhere  highly likely highly likely so so you  had there's niches nature called data  will will - stupidity which I really  liked so because he thought of stupidity  as being it you know it's it's you have  to take it into account fundamentally  and work with it and so and so you can  take these tentative steps on your  pathway to destiny and you can assume  that you're gonna do it badly and that's  really useful because you don't have to  beat yourself up it's pretty easy to do  it badly but the thing is it's way  better to do it badly than not to do it  at all and that's the continual message  that echoes through these historical  stories in Genesis it's like these are  flawed people they should have got the  hell out of their house way before they  did and they go out and they stumble  around in tyranny and famine and self  betrayal and and violence and but it's a  hell of a lot better than just rotting  away at home and that's the that's great  so that's good and so why is that well  okay so you you start your path and you  think that you're heading you know  towards your star and so you go in that  direction and then because you're here  the world looks a particular way but  then when you move here the world looks  different and you're different as a  consequence of having made that voyage  and so what that means is that now that  thing that glimmers in front of you is  going to have shifted  location because you weren't very good  at specifying it to begin with and now  that you're a little sharper and more  focused than you were it's it's going to  reveal itself with more accuracy to you  and so then you have to take you know  it's almost like 180 degree reversal but  it isn't because you know you've  I mean you've gone this far and that's a  long ways to get that far but that's a  lot farther than you would be if you  just stayed where you were waiting and  so it doesn't matter that you overshoot  continually because as you overshoot  even if you don't learn what you should  have done you're going to continually  learn what you shouldn't keep doing and  if you learn enough about what you  shouldn't keep doing then that's  tantamount at some point to learning at  the same time what you should be doing  so it's okay so it's like this now  what's cool about it though I think is  that as you progress the degree of  overshooting starts to decline right and  that we know that there's nothing  hypothetical about that as you learn a  new skill like even to play it play a  song on the piano for example you over  shoot madly you're making all sorts of  mistakes to begin with and then the  mistakes they disappear there's a great  TED talk I think it was about this guy  set up a really advanced computational  recording system in his home and  recorded every single utterance his  young child made while learning to speak  and then he put together the child's  attempts to say certain phonemes and put  them in the list and you can hear the  child deviating madly to begin with and  then after hundreds and hundreds of  repetitions just zeroing right in on the  exact phoneme so you know I you might  not know this but when kids babble  because they start babbling when they're  quite young they babble every human  phoneme including all sorts of phonemes  that adults can't say and then they they  die into their language so that after  they learn say English then there's all  sorts of phonemes they can no longer  hear or pronounce but to begin with it's  all there  which is really quite interesting but so  they zip as they learn a particular  language they zero in on the proper way  to pronounce that and their errors  minimize and every time you learn  something that's how it is and that's  really useful to know too because it  means that it's okay to wander around  stupidly before you fix your destination  now you see that echoed in exodus right  because what happens is that the  Egyptians or the Hebrews escaped a  tyranny which is kind of whatever you do  personally and psychologically when you  escape from your previous set of  stupidly held and ignorant and stubborn  axioms it's like away from that tyranny  it's like great I freed myself from that  well then what well you think well now  I'm on the way it's no you're not now  you're in the desert where you wander  around stupidly you know and worship the  wrong things until you finally organize  yourself morally again and head in the  proper direction so that's worth knowing  too because you think well I got rid of  a lot of things baggage excess baggage  that I didn't need in my life and now  everything's okay it's like no it's not  you've got rid of a whole set of  scaffolds that were keeping you in place  even though they were pathological now  you have nothing and nothing actually  turns out to be better than something  pathological but you're still stuck with  the problem of nothing and and that's  well that's exactly why exodus is  structured the way that it is it's that  you escape from eternity its terrain  we're no longer slaves yeah well now  you're nihilistic and lost it's not  necessarily an improvement but it is but  it is the pre see it's also useful to  know that because you can also be  deluded into the idea that imagine that  you're trying to become enlightened  which might mean to turn all those parts  of you on that could be turned on you  think well that's just a linear pathway  uphill you know it's just from one  success to another it's no it's not it's  like here you are and you're not doing  too badly and the first step is a  complete bloody catastrophe it's worse  and then maybe you can pull yourself  together and you hit a new plateau and  then that crumbles and shakes and bang  it's worse again and so  because part of the reason that people  don't become enlightened is because it's  punctuated by intermittent deserts  essentially by intermittent catastrophes  and if you don't know that well then  you're basically screwed because you go  ahead on your movement forward and you  collapse and you think well that didn't  work I collapsed it's like no that's par  for the course it's not indication that  you failed it's just indication that  it's really hard and that when you learn  something you also unlearn something and  the thing you unlearned is probably  useful and unlearning it actually is  painful  you know let's say if you have to get  out of a bad relationship it's like not  every not any real there isn't any  relationship that's a hundred percent  bad and so when you jump out of it well  maybe you're in better shape but you're  still lonesome and disoriented and you  don't know what your past was and you  don't know what your present is and you  don't know what your future is it's  that's not that's why people stay with  the devil they know instead of you know  looking for the devil they don't know so  so anyways the fact that you're full of  faults doesn't mean you have to stop and  thank God for that that's a really  useful thing and the fact that you're  full of faults doesn't mean that you  can't learn and so you can pause it an  ideal and you're gonna be wrong about it  but it doesn't matter because what  you're right about is positing the ideal  moving towards it if the actual ideal  isn't conceptualize perfectly well first  surprise surprise cuz like what are you  going to do that's perfect so it doesn't  matter that it's imperfect imperfect it  just matters that you do it and that you  move forward so that's really that's  really positive news as far as I'm  concerned because you can actually do  that right you can do it badly anyone  can do that so that's that's useful okay  so like if you were an efficient person  you would have just done that but you're  not but who cares you know you still end  up in the in the same place and maybe  the trip is even more interesting who  knows probably two interesting young I  began to understand that the goal of  psychic development by which he means  psychological development or spiritual  development is the self there's no  linear evolution  there's only a circumambulation of the  self a getting closer it's like it's  like you're spiraling into something  something like that and the thing that  you're spiraling into recedes as you  move towards it and gets more and more  sophisticated and well developed as you  move towards it because you're not gonna  run out of goals right no matter how  much you have your act together  there's probably undoubtedly 30  dimensions along which you could get  your act together a lot more so and some  of those aren't even conceivable to you  when you're in your initial on carved  state let's say uniform development  exists at most at the beginning later  everything points towards the center  this insight gave me stability and  gradually my inner peace returned so  this is fun  on the left there that's the short  Cathedral that's the one that has the  maze in it that I told you about they  actually light that up with lasers now  and so that's it lit up with lasers and  so so they're turning it into a  Cathedral of light which i think is  really fascinating and it's a it's a  continuation of the same idea right  because the stained glass windows were  obviously I wouldn't call them primitive  attempts to do that I mean stained glass  windows are pretty impressive you know  buddy it's an elaboration of the same  thing so now you can go to that  Cathedral they light up the whole town  like that which is really something and  so there and there's how the cathedral  is built it's a cross and remember the  cross is an X that marks the center of  the world and the cross is the place  where each individual is and I think  that's the fundamental message of  Christianity is the cross marks the  place where every single individual is  and it's a tragic place that consists of  suffering and exposure to malevolence  and that the only way to come to terms  with it is to accept it and that seems  to me I don't see anything metaphysical  about that statement whatsoever it's  like well x marks the spot  fair enough you're in a spot you're  right in the center of your world it's  right in the center of the world as far  as you're concerned and the same with  the rest of us it's characterized by  suffering and exposure to malevolence  there's no doubt about that what are you  gonna do about that  bitter resentful hateful all that does  is make it worse so you have to accept  it now that's not an easy thing because  that's actually I would say a heroic  task to voluntarily accept the  conditions of your own existence and  that happens out the cross so that's  fine and that's associated with light  well that's good that that's associated  with light you wouldn't want that to be  associated with darkness that would be a  bad thing so and so there's the there's  the the labyrinth that was built in 1280  and so the idea is you walk in here it's  the same idea as that star sequence of  slides that I just showed you so here's  the ideas that north south west and east  so that's the whole world laid out in  two dimensions and so the question is  how do you get to the center now we  already know what the center is the  center is the center of the cross that's  the place of maximal suffering you could  say maximal malevolence as well but it's  also the place where that's transcendent  so how do you get there well the answer  is well you don't just stand on the  outside looking in  that's not gonna help so and you can't  just run right to the center even if  you're in California and so you have to  walk in here and then you see you go  like this and you go to every single  place every single place on that on that  little cosmos and then once you've gone  to every single place and expanded  yourself as a consequence of going north  and west and east and south then there's  enough of you so that you're at so that  you can tolerate being first of all that  you could figure out where the center is  but also that you can tolerate being at  the center and so that's what that  represents that's pretty and look I mean  let's make no mistake about it hey  people were pretty damn serious about  those ideas like that's a that's quite  the piece of work for people in the 12th  century  you know those some of those damn  cathedrals took 300 years to build we  don't build anything that takes 300  years  people were putting a lot of effort into  whatever these things meant you know and  if you think they meant bearded man in  the sky then you know it's hard to it's  hard to account for the kind of  motivation that would produce these  buildings with that kind of paucity of  conceptualization you know the towns and  and it was certainly the case in charge  is that they groaned under the tax  burden that was required to produce  these now you might think well that's  partly tyrannical and no doubt that's  the case but but that's not the whole  story the whole story is that the people  who produce those buildings they thought  about every bit of it it's nothing's  accidental and they're trying to portray  something just like that window is  trying to portray something that's the  same thing as this it's the center from  which all things manifest themselves you  see it  that's Christ there and being portrayed  as as that center or the center within  him something like that very much like  the chakras and in in yogic practice  same basic idea it's the opening up of  the internal structure and and and its  proper realization so there are people  walking the labyrinth so that's the coat  of many colors right that's that's this  differentiated mode of being that  enables you to be competent and at home  in the widest possible number of places  and that that's a real differentiation  of your personality it's a breaking  through the boundaries of your  personality including the ones that you  impose on yourself to become someone  who's useful wherever they're put and  that's really relevant to this story of  Joseph - because one of the things that  happens to Joseph is that well a lot of  bad things happen to him because he's  the favorite of his father his brothers  hate him and so the first they're gonna  throw him in a pit I think they do throw  him in a pit then they sell them to be a  slave then he ends up in we'll go  through the story  he ends up some places where you  probably wouldn't want to go prison  being one of them but it doesn't matter  because even when they put him in prison  he's actually not imprisoned he just  figures out how to make the prison work  way better and then he's in control of  the prison and it really it's an  interesting I had this friend you know  and he was very smart but very cynical  and he wasn't employed very well and he  got a little older and he should have  given his level of intelligence and  employability and so he had to take jobs  that weren't very intellectually  challenging you know and one of the  things I tried to convince him of was  that even if he worked he wanted to work  behind the parts department in an  automotive store because he liked cars  but it was beneath him you know because  it was sort of a as far as he was  concerned it was a he was too smart for  a job like that which actually turned  out not to be true he wasn't smart  enough for a job like that or he wasn't  wise enough but you know what one of the  things I tried to tell him was then  you're looking at the situation wrong  because even in a simple job so-called  simple job like let's say dishwashing in  a restaurant which I did an awful lot of  it's not that simple you're dealing with  a lot of other people very fast staff  changeover you're feeding people you're  helping them have a celebration you're  helping them take a break like you can  do it really well and then the kitchen  can operate properly and then people can  come out to the restaurant it's not a  bloody catastrophe and like your even  when you're doing something that's a  menial job so to speak like dishwashing  there are ways of doing it really badly  resentfully and horribly and doing it  really well and as soon as you do it  really well it's not a menial job  anymore  it immediately transforms no I mean you  can be around people who won't let that  happen and you should go get another job  if that's the case but if you do it  properly then it's not menial at all and  that's also a good way out of resentment  you think well I've just got this you  know two-bit job it's like yeah what if  you did it as well as you possibly could  you know what would happen well the  first thing that would happen is you'd  get a lot smarter that's for sure and  that that's hardly  a negative thing okay so that's the coat  of many colors so it's an intimation of  what Joseph is like and what we're  seeing with all of these patriarchal  figures is the continual realization of  the ideal person right you could think  about it as successive approximations of  the ideal person and the story is  exploring all sorts of different  possibilities including ones that are  very violent and catastrophic and  malevolent it's trying to cover the  entire territory and to focus in on  what's the proper way through the maze  the maze of life the labyrinth and the  hint here is that while you should be  multi-dimensional these are the  generations of Jacob Joseph being 17  years old was feeding the flock with his  brethren and the lad was with his sons  of Bilhah and with the sons of Zilpah  his father's wives and Joseph brought  unto his father their evil report well  we already know that Joseph is Jacob's  favorite so that doesn't make him very  popular among his brothers he's younger  and now we also find out that he's been  set up more or less as you might say a  snitch because that's what this phrase  means is that he goes out and watches  his older brothers and if they do  something they shouldn't do then he  comes trotting back to Jacob and reports  well that's not gonna make you popular  so and you would say well is that  Joseph's problem or jacob's problem and  I would say and this is something I  learned from reading dealing to is that  that's a conspiratorial problem right is  it's the parents at fault but so is the  child who agrees to do that they've  they've got a little cabal going and you  might say well it's only the parents  fault but the son will be taking  advantage of every advantage that offers  him because he could say no to I won't  do that so anyway so Joseph is the  favorite he's a bit of a teacher's pet  that's what it looks like now Israel  loved Joseph more than all his colors  because he was the son of his old age  and he made him a coat of many colors  and when his brethren saw that their  father loved him more than  all his brethren they hated him and  could not speak peaceably unto him so  let's say you have a child or number of  children and one of them is your  favorite how should you treat that child  well it isn't obvious that you do them  any favors by overtly making them your  favorite right I mean first of all maybe  you don't challenge them as much as you  should and second of all you definitely  set up a Cain and Abel like scenario in  the household and that or maybe it's an  eatable situation too because you happen  to love your child more than you love  your your spouse which is that's not a  recipe for familial harmony so it seems  to be a bad idea okay so now we have two  reasons that Joseph is not liked by his  brothers is one is well he's a bit of a  Rat Fink and the other is that he's the  peas the favorite and he's playing that  to the hilt by the looks of things and  when his brethren saw that their father  loved him more than all his brethren  then all his brethren they hated him and  could not speak peaceably unto him okay  and Joseph dreamed a dream and he told  it to his brethren and they hated him  the more he said unto them hear I pray  you this dream which I have dreamed for  behold we were binding wheat sheaves in  the field and lo my sheaf arose and  behold your sheaves stood round about  and bowed to my sheaf and his and  remember he's yeah the young one right  and and also the daughter of the  favorite wife which is another thing  that's or the son of the favorite wife  which is another thing not really  working in his favor and his brethren  said to him shalt thou indeed reign over  us or shalt thou indeed have dominion  over us and they hated them yet the more  for his dreams and for his words well  there there's a shock you know that  makes perfect sense so and it gets worse  so you see here well there's the wheat  sheaves bowing there and and then you  see this what's going on here well  that's not the end of his let's call it  grandiosity and there's an idea to in in  the Old Testament especially in the  stories of Joseph that if God sends you  a dream twice he really means it and so  I don't know if that's true although I  do know that people have repeating  dreams it might be true that the a dream  you have twice is really trying to punch  something home you know it's certainly  the case that recurrent nightmares are  meaningful and that recurrent nightmares  are associated quite tightly with  decreased states of mental health and  that if you can treat the nightmare  which is often quite easy by the way  then the some of the mental health  problems will decrease so repeated  dreams seem to be important anyways he  dreamed yet another dream and told it to  his brethren and said behold I've had  another dream and be and behold the Sun  and the moon and the Eleven stars bowed  to me and he told it to his father and  to his brothers and his father rebuked  him and said unto you unto Him what is  this dream that thou has dreamed shall I  in my and your mother and your brothers  indeed come to bow down ourselves to  thee to the earth and his brethren  envied him but his father observed to  saying well what the hell do you make of  something like that right if someone  tells you that it's like are they  responsible for their dreams  we don't really seem we don't really  hold ourselves responsible for for the  dreams we have at night and what do you  make of a dream is like one of the  things that Jung pointed out this is  where he differed from Freud  substantially as Freud tended to think  that the dream hid its meaning because  its contents weren't acceptable to the  conscious mind and Jung said no no you  don't understand that's not what happens  what happens is the dream is doing the  best it can to express something that  the person doesn't yet really know and  Jung thought about the dream as a  manifestation of nature it wasn't  associated with the ego at all it was  just like you have a dream and there are  things happening and it the same way  that when you walk into a dinner party  there are things happening there you  know it's not the dream isn't something  that's subject to your capacity for  manipulation it's something that happens  to you not something that you do and so  so if someone has a dream like that well  you've got three options you can just  discount dreams altogether which is what  people in the modern world tend to do  which is a very bad idea because there  are thoughts and you shouldn't discount  them you know I mean and they're hardly  random as some neuroscientists claim  that's  absolutely cockeyed theory that random  he like television snow on a TV set if  it was random so so one is while you  just discount dreams the other is that  you consider the person a liar and a  braggart and a narcissist and the third  is well what's the third it's like he  dreamt that the Sun and the moon and the  stars bowed down to him you might think  about that two or three times so but  it's not necessarily something that's  going to make you happy and his brethren  went to feed their father's flock and  shechem so they took off and Israel said  unto Joseph do you not thy brethren feed  the flock and Shechem come and I will  send thee unto Him and he said him and  he said to him here here am I and when  they saw him afar off even before he  came near unto them they conspired  against him to slay him rough people  back then right this is this sort of  thing is happening quite frequently and  they said to one another behold the  dreamer cometh come now therefore let us  slay him cast him into some pit and we  will say some evil beast hath devoured  him and we shall see what becomes of his  dreams so there's an echo of the Cain  and Abel story there obviously you know  I mean it's not quite as clear because  in the Cain and Abel story Abel is  clearly just doing well and here you  can't quite get a handle on Joseph's  character you can't tell if he is  actually the elect or if he's just a  spoiled brat with delusions of grandeur  you know and but it doesn't matter  because his brothers are so irritated at  his the fact that he's favored and  perhaps even the fact that he might be  someone destined for for something  special that they find it perfectly  reasonable to destroy that and it's so  hard so interesting how often that motif  of pulling down an ideal manifests  itself in these old stories right it's  it's the pattern is established in the  Cain and Abel story it just repeats and  repeats and repeats and I think that's  dead true I think it just repeats all  the time so that people are annoyed  about how tragic their lives are  annoyed that they're subject to  malevolence and they're annoyed that  they're not doing as well as other  people are doing and that makes them  that puts them exactly into this state  of mind  now maybe with modern people if you're  gonna kill someone because you're  resentful as a modern person you don't  generally slay them and throw them into  a pit you know what you do is you just  kill them slowly over a few decades and  it isn't obvious to me that that's any  better so I've seen plenty of married  couples who were in that situation it's  like it's like yeah well there is this  mitch hedberg he used to complain about  turtlenecks hey so it was like being  strangled by a really weak midget it's  probably really politically incorrect  jokes but it's a funny joke so and then  you see you see relationships that are  like that it's like each person has  their hands around the neck of the other  person but they don't have enough  courage to actually to squeeze they just  put enough pressure on just cut the  circulation off a tiny bit so the person  just gets like they die over a 30-year  period something like that so yeah and  you all laugh because you know it's true  that's why and we will say some evil  beast half devoured him which would be  true actually it would be the evil beast  that's inside the brothers and we shall  see what will become of his dreams  haha that's a that's interesting too  because so they want to spite themselves  because maybe Joseph is something  special and then they want to spite  their father which is probably not the  wisest idea because they owe him some  gratitude I mean maybe he's acting like  a pain in the neck there's some evidence  for that but this is a little bit harsh  but they also want to spite God just  like Cain did because that's what it  means we shall see what will become of  his dreams right because then as soon as  you're in some sense trying to fight  against the intuition of someone the  natural intuition of someone you set  yourself up against the structure of  being itself and so pretty bad  and Ruben heard it and he delivered them  out of their hands and said no let us  not kill him and Ruben said unto them  shed no blood but cast him into this pit  that's in the wilderness  it's like Rubens the good guy in this  story yeah and and there's no water in  the pit by the way inlay no hand upon  him that he might rid him out of their  hands to deliver him to his father again  hmm  so Ruben was actually trying to save him  said he might rid him out of their hands  to deliver him to his father again and  it came to pass when Joseph came unto  his brethren that they stripped him of  his coat his coat of many colors that  was on him and they took him and cast  him into a pit and the pit was empty and  there was no water in it and then they  sat down to eat bread and lifted up  their eyes and looked and behold a  company of Ishmaelites come came from  Gilead with their camels bearing spices  and balm and myrrh going to carry it  down to Egypt and Judah said unto his  brethren how does it profit us if we  kill our brother and conceal his blood  so he's the practical guy here's what  why would we kill him when we can sell  him it's like come let us sell him to  the Ishmaelites and let not our hand be  upon him for he is our brother in our  flesh and his brethren were content then  there passed by Midianites merchantman  and they drew and lifted up joseph out  of the pit and sold joseph to the  Ishmaelites for 20 pieces of silver it's  a amount that echoes through into the  future and they brought Joseph into  Egypt I'm never really sure how these  slavery stories work it's like so it's  two 2,500 3,000 years ago and I decided  I'm gonna sell you to the Ishmaelites  and that just works out they I get the  money you get to be a slave and they  take you away I don't really understand  how that works I can't figure out how  people weren't just selling each other  all the time  but maybe if your family you can do it  so they're they sold him and Reuben  returned to the pit and behold Joseph  was not there and Reuben rent his  clothes so Reubens very upset about this  and he returned unto his brothers and  said the child is not and I where shall  I go  and they conspired they took Joseph's  coat and killed a kid of the goats and  dipped the coat in the blood that's  interesting too because blood is  actually another color right so he's got  this coat of many colors and blood is  definitely a color and so this is the  addition in some sense of the color of  blood to Joseph's coat and I would say  it's probably a necessary color because  I don't think that you're serious enough  till your coat has been dipped in blood  that can happen in many ways and they  sent the coat of many colors and they  brought it to their father and said so  they lied to him it's very very nasty  business this they they sell his son to  slavery they claim that he's dead they  lied to him they they put him into an  extreme state of grief there's a lot of  hatred underneath that right tremendous  amount of hatred for Joseph and also for  Jacob this we have found know now  whether it be thy sons coat or not and  he knew it he said it's my son's coat  and evil beast has devoured him Joseph  is without doubt rent in pieces and  Jacob tore his clothes and put sackcloth  on his loins and mourned for many days  and all his sons and daughters rose up  to comfort him but he refused to be  comforted and he said I'll go down unto  my grave mourning my son does his father  wept for him so that's Jacob collapsing  at the news and the Midianites sold  Joseph into Egypt unto Potiphar an  officer of Pharaohs and captain of the  guard and Joseph was brought down to  Egypt and port afar an officer of  Pharaoh captain of the guard and  Egyptian bought him of the hands of the  Ishmaelites which had brought him down  thither so now he's a slave so now you'd  think well that would be this is a man  who has a lot of reason to be irritated  at the structure of reality right he's  gone from being the favorite to being  betrayed by all of his brothers that's  pretty rough and then he's being  transformed into a slave and now he's  being he's being sold to work as a slave  so you'd think that that would corrupt  his character because  you know one of the things I think this  is the case anyways I think people are  always looking for an excuse to have  their character corrupted because if  your character is corrupted then you get  to lie and you get to cheat you get to  steal and you get to betray and you get  to act resentfully and you get to do  nothing and that's all easy it's easier  to lie than to tell the truth it's  easier to do nothing than to do  something so there's always part of you  thinking well I need a justification for  being useless and horrible because  that'd be a lot less work and so then if  something terrible comes along you think  AHA that's just exactly the excuse that  I was waiting for and then out all that  comes you know Solzhenitsyn when he was  in the concentration camps in Russia  watching how people behaved you know he  said that there were people that were  put in the camps who immediately became  trustees or guards and they were even  more vicious than the people who had  been hired as guards and his idea was  that they had collected all that he  called it foul Ness if I remember  correctly around them in normal life but  they didn't have the opportunity to  express it but as soon as you gave them  the opportunity it was like there it was  right away and so so one of the messages  that seems to echo through these old  testament stories is that just because  something terrible happens to you  doesn't mean that you get to be that you  get to wander off the path and make  things worse and maybe it doesn't matter  how terrible it is that what happens to  you that's a tough call you know because  you see people now and then in life who  they've really got it rough man like 50  bad things are happening to them at the  same time and you think oh it's no  wonder if you were bitter and resentful  and hostile be like yeah no wonder but  then you meet people and Solzhenitsyn  again talked about this in the Gulag  Archipelago he said he met lots of  people in the North Lodz  he met enough people to impress him in  the concentration camp system who didn't  allow their misfortunes to corrupt them  and that's something because maybe the  only real misfortune is to become  corrupted that's a really useful thing  to think you know maybe the rest of it  maybe the rest of it is trivial in  comparison  I know that's a rough thing because you  can be in very harsh circumstances but I  do think there's something to that and  the Lord was with Joseph and he was a  prosperous man and he was in the house  of his master the Egyptian and his  master saw that the Lord was with him  and that Lord made all that he did to  prosper in his hand so that's an echo of  the idea that we encountered earlier  about walking with God right so Adam  walked with God before he ate the fruit  with Eve and then he wouldn't walk with  God and then Noah walked with God and  Abraham walked with God and so the idea  is well that's that alignment with the  highest ideal I think it's something  like that and you know we could think  about that as a metaphysical claim as  well but I don't think it is I mean I've  got thousands of letters now in the last  year from people who have told me that  they were in a pit that's exactly right  and that they decided that they were  going to try to put their lives together  and that it worked and so that's really  something you know when they write  surprised it's like well I decided that  I was gonna work hard at what I was  doing and I wasn't gonna lie any more  than absolutely necessary I thought I'd  give it a try for a few months you know  and all sorts of good things started to  happen to me it's like maybe that's how  the world works now obviously it doesn't  work like that all the time right  because you can get sliced off at the  knees I mean there's an arbitrary  element to existence that that you can't  wish away but that doesn't mean that  there are it doesn't mean that there  aren't bad strategies and good  strategies and so I do think that one of  the most fundamental existential  questions is like if things aren't going  well for you and your life is are you  absolutely certain that you're doing  absolutely everything you can to put  things in order because if you're not  then you shouldn't complain because you  don't know to what degree you're  actually contributing or even causing  the circumstance now that's a very  annoying thing to think and I'm not  trying to blame the victim  you know I know that people end up with  lung cancer because they were exposed to  asbestos you know and I'm not trying to  although I also know too that if you  have lung cancer because you've been  exposed to asbestos that can be a  tragedy or it can be hell and to some  degree  that depends on how you conduct yourself  so I mean I know that's pretty gloomy  possibilities right but so anyway so  Joseph is a slave but it turns out that  he's uh he hasn't sacrificed the  integrity of his character and so it  turns out that being it turns out that  he's not a slave it's just that everyone  around him thinks he's a slave but he's  not so that's pretty interesting he was  a goodly person and well favored well so  he's a good guy and he's an impressive  specimen as well this is pretty  interesting given the current political  climate I would say and it came to pass  after these things that his master's  wife cast her eyes upon Joseph and she  said lie with me that means that  actually has two meanings right but he  refused and said unto his master's wife  behold my master does not know what's  with me in the house and he's committed  all that he has to my hand there's no  one greater in this house than I neither  hath he kept back anything for me but  you because you are his wife how then  can I do this great wickedness  wickedness and sin against God and it  came to pass as she spake to Joseph day  by day that he hearkened not unto her to  lie by her or be with her it's being  sexually harassed Joseph and it came to  pass well its rounds right I mean look  look at the painting and it came to pass  about this time that Joseph went into  the house to do his business and there  was none of the men of the house there  with in and she caught him by his  garment saying lie with me and he left  his garment in her hand and fled and got  him out so that's so kind of  embarrassing for poor Joseph I would say  and a bit on the suspicious side and it  came to pass when she saw that he had  left his garment in her hand and was  fled forth that she called unto the men  of her house and spake unto them see see  he hath brought in a Hebrew to mark us  he came in unto  you lie with me and I cried with a loud  voice so what is it hell hath no fury  like a woman scorned that's the proper  commentary on that and it came to pass  when he heard that I lifted up my voice  and cried that he left his garment with  me and fled and got himself out and it  came to pass when his master heard the  words of his wife so that's the farro  which she spake unto him saying after  this manner did thy servant to me his  wrath was kindled and joseph's master  took him and put him in prison a place  where the Kings prisoners were was were  bound and he was there in the prison  well that sort of sucks it's like first  his brothers betray him and throw him in  a pit and then he gets made a slave  which is probably better than being in  the pit and then he becomes sort of like  King slaves so that's working out pretty  well and now someone lies about him he  gets betrayed again and now it's into  the prison with him and so it's this  it's this again right it's the same  thing it's Sisyphus up with the rock and  then down and it's order chaos order  chaos and then you have to think well  are you the order or you the chaos or  you the thing that's moving between them  because that's the right thing to be  because otherwise you're just order and  that's a really bad idea or you're just  chaos and that's a really bad idea you  can be the thing that's dynamically  mediating between them and that's what  he's doing but the Lord was with Joseph  and showed him mercy and gave him favor  in the sight of the keeper of the prison  that's no easy thing to do I would think  you know it's like you're thrown in  prison and now the jailer likes you now  how exactly are you going to manage that  it's a good thing to think about because  you might think well if you were really  in dire straits how is it that you  should conduct yourself so that you have  the highest probability of having things  work out and it's not saying well Joseph  took over the thumbscrew you know and  started using that on the other  prisoners that that's not the indication  here at all it's that he's doing  something he's acting like a person who  isn't a prisoner even though he's in the  prison just like he was acting like  someone who wasn't a slave when he was a  slave and so  it makes you wonder who you can be  despite the fact that other people think  that you're whatever you appear to be  and the keeper of the prison committed  to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that  were in the prison and whatsoever they  did there he was the doer of it the  keeper of the prison looked not to  anything that was under his hand because  the Lord was with him and that which he  did the Lord made it to prosper so it's  a repeat its a repeat of exactly what  happened when he was the slave of the  Pharaoh except it's one rung deeper into  hell so to speak right so it's slave  Pharaoh and here it's prisoner jail  master but it doesn't matter the same  thing happens so now Joseph is  imprisonment the Pharaoh has a fit one  day of peak and throws the chief of his  Butler's into prison and the chief of  his Baker's and they have a dream  each of them and Joseph interprets the  dreams seems to be something that he can  do and he tells the butler that his  dream means that the Pharaoh was going  to forgive him and put him back in his  position and he tells the baker that the  Pharaoh isn't going to forgive him and  that he's going to take off his head and  hang him in a tree which was rather  rough dream but that is what huh that's  what happens so anyways that the Baker  or the butler goes free and Joseph says  look you know maybe you could just keep  in mind the fact that I did you a bit of  a favor here and told you something that  was accurate but the chief didn't really  remember once he once he was freed  interpreting dreams in prison and so now  the Pharaoh has a dream and he actually  has two dreams so it's another one of  those doubled motifs so the ideas these  are really important dreams because they  came in a pair and behold there came out  of the river seven well-favored kind and  fat flesh so cattle and they fed the men  Oh  meadow and behold seven other cattle  came up after the Mount of the river  ill-favored and lean fleshed starving  and stood by the other cows on the brink  of the river and the ill-favored and  lean flesh  I did eat up the seven well-favored and  fat so Pharaoh awoke hey fair enough  it's pretty nasty dream and then he has  another dream to hit it home and he  slept and dreamt the second time and  behold seven years of corn came up upon  one stalk rankin good and behold seven  thin ears and blasted with the east wind  sprung up after them and the seven thin  ears devoured the seven rank and full  ears and Pharaoh awoke and beheld it was  a dream and then it says a little later  and for that the dream was doubled unto  Pharaoh twice it is because the thing is  established by God and God will shortly  bring it to pass it's interesting you  know because one of the better theories  about dreams is that they're part of the  way that the right and left hemisphere  communicate or maybe the nonverbal part  of the brain communicates with the  verbal brand verbal part of the brain  and so the nonverbal part of the brain  which is less differentiated and thinks  more globally is looking for patterns  and anomalies in the world things that  don't fit well with the current way of  conceptualizing the world things that  make you anxious and uncertain and those  are things you haven't mastered right so  they don't fit well into your  conceptualization of the world by  definition because if you had mastered  them they wouldn't make you anxious  nervous and so the the nonverbal parts  of your brain are like an alarm system  they're looking around for places where  you're probably wrong and then they put  those in images and try to conceptualize  them so that you can update your model  of reality to take them into account but  that also produces a fair bit of  negative emotion especially at night and  so so we know that we know if you  deprive people of dreams that they go  insane very rapidly animals as well  necessary part of mental equilibrium the  way you do that with rats in case you  want to know is that you've got rats  that you want to drive insane this is  how you do it  so you put the rat on a like a pedestal  that's pretty small and then when you  fall it's surrounded by water and then  when he falls asleep his nose hits the  water then he wakes up and so you can  deprive the rat of sleep and that  doesn't the rats don't respond to  very well after some period of time so  that's one of the ways that that's been  discovered but anyways the dream does  seem to be an update mechanism and so if  if you have a very powerful dream like a  nightmare especially if it's repeating  it's like something is trying to hammer  on the door that needs to be let in and  often you don't know how to let it in  that's that's a problem so but then  Pharaoh sent and called Joseph because  he had talked to his his Butler and they  brought him hastily out of the dungeon  and Joseph shaved himself and changed  his clothes and came in unto Pharaoh I  guess he didn't want a shark Pharaoh  with how people dressed in the prison  and Pharaoh said unto Joseph I've  dreamed a dream and there's none that  can interpret it I've heard say of thee  that you could understand a dream to  interpret it and Joseph said it's not me  God will give Pharaoh an answer of peace  it's so Jacob isn't taking credit for  his ability to interpret dreams which  also indicates quite interestingly  there's there's nothing that despite the  fact that he's successful incompetent  he's not narcissistic like if he happens  to have this gift he regards it as a  gift and not as something that you know  renounced his favor it's just something  that he happens to be able to do and so  that's that's a hallmark of someone  who's got a pretty well put-together  personality as far as I'm concerned  because you know people have gifts that  they didn't really earn those would be  your talents your intelligence your good  looks if you happen to have good looks  etc and they're not there's no sense  being all puffed up about that because  it's it's great it's luck of the draw  though and the proper attitude is to  note that it's luck of the draw to be  grateful for it it's quite a fine  painting that one behold there come  seven years of great plenty throughout  the island of Egypt and then there shall  arise after them seven years of famine  and all the plenty shall be forgotten  and the famine shall consume the land  and the Plenty shall not be known in the  land by reason of that famine following  issue for it shall be very Grievous so  now we  to that Jacob he can interpret dreams  but he's also the sort of person who can  look into the future and think this is  sort of what Adam was called on to do  when he got kicked out of the garden of  paradise is you're going to be able to  conceptualize that even if things are  going well now that that doesn't mean  that they're going to go well into the  future and so he's the aunt and not the  grasshopper right in the grasshopper and  the ant story it's like everything's  good but you should wake the hell up and  you should test to see how things can go  wrong and you can see if your systems  can survive them things going wrong and  which is something that I think we could  all hearken to because I think we do a  very bad job in the modern world of  testing to see if our systems can go  wrong okay so the Pharaoh was pretty  impressed by this dream interpretation  and pretty worried about it and I guess  he's a reasonable person despite the  fact that he put Joseph in jail I guess  he didn't have much choice now therefore  let Pharaoh look for a man dis discreet  and wise and set him over the land of  Egypt let Pharaoh do this and let him  appoint officers over the land this is  what Joseph is saying and take up the  fifth part of the land of Egypt in the  seven plenteous years and let them  gather all the food of those good years  that come and lay up corn under the hand  of Pharaoh and let them keep food in the  cities and just like that Joseph is  restored to his position so Pharaoh said  unto Joseph I am Pharaoh and without  thee shall no man lift up his hand or  foot in all of the land of Egypt and so  he comes out of the prison and he really  in some sense as far as I'm concerned he  actually occupies a position that's  higher than the position of the Pharaoh  depends on how you look at it because  the Pharaoh has relegated himself to  ceremonial status right Joseph has all  the responsibilities makes all the  decisions so de-facto he's the pharaoh  he doesn't get the glory precisely  although he's not doing too bad for  himself not there's a lesson in that too  I wrote these rules for Quora a long  time ago and one of them I've written  them into this some of them into this  book you guys got a pamphlet about today  one of the rules that I didn't write  about was  um note that responsive note that  opportunity lurks where responsibility  has been abdicated which is really  interesting I think I mean I've seen  people in their jobs they say things  like well my the guy I work with doesn't  do any work it's like well you could do  it I mean I know there's limits to that  but one of the things you can do at work  is make yourself indispensable I mean  you might get the cane types against you  if you do that but there's something to  be said for being indispensable because  when people start to be dispensed with  you probably won't be one of them or  even if you are then the fact that  you're indispensable just means you can  go somewhere else and be indispensable  there and that's just as useful so it's  very very difficult to permanently put  down someone who's really good at doing  things because they can just go off and  do them somewhere else and one of the  ways that you get like that is to take  responsibility when someone else is  failing to do so and you think well I  shouldn't have to do that that's one way  of thinking about it another way of  thinking about it is oh good I get to do  that and the seven years of plenty estas  that was in the land of Egypt were ended  and the seven years of dearth began to  come according as joseph has said and  the dearth was in all the lands well  that's an archetypal story right in the  archetypal story it's the business cycle  story it's a little harsher when you're  starving obviously but that's not the  point the point is is that sometimes  things are getting good and sometimes  things are getting bad and that's you  can be sure that that's the case that's  gonna happen to you and so the wise  person takes stock of the fact that  things are going to get bad is this is  the same thing that happens with Noah  it's like assume the flood cuz it's  gonna happen and you think well it's a  hell of a world that has floods it's  like not if you have a boat right it it  helps a lot if you if there's a flood  and you have a boat it's like you can  float on the flood and then it's not  such a problem and so if you refuse to  look not the fact that things are going  to be going downhill bad  and that you're going to be in a pit at  some point you and your family perhaps  then when it happens it will be as bad  as it possibly can be but if you're  awake and alert to that possibility then  you can mitigate it and the dearth was  in all the lands but in the land of  Egypt there was bread and when the land  of Egypt was famished the people cried  to Pharaoh for bread and Pharaoh said  unto the Egyptians go to Joseph what he  says to you to do you do that and the  famine was all over the face of the  earth and Joe Joseph opened up the  storehouses and sold to the Egyptians  and the famine waxed sore in the land of  Egypt and all the countries came into  Egypt to buy to Joseph to buy corn  because the famine was sore in all the  lands now when Jacob saw that there was  corn in Egypt Jacob said unto his sons  why are you standing around looking at  each other  he said I've heard that there's corn in  Egypt get down there and buy from by for  us so that we may live and not die it's  a pretty straightforward advice that and  Joseph's ten brothers went down to buy  corn in Egypt but Benjamin Joseph's  brother so that's the youngest one right  the only one left it's the one that was  younger than Joseph the only youngest  one and also rachel's other son but Jeb  Benjamin Joseph's brother Jacob didn't  send because he was worried that  something bad would happen to him which  kind of indicates to me that maybe Jacob  was a bit suspicious about what had  happened to Joseph the last time he sent  all the brothers on a adventure and  Joseph was the governor over all the  land and and he it was that sold to all  the people of the land and Joseph's  brothers came and bowed down themselves  before him with their faces to the earth  well there's the dream now the thing is  too is that one question you have in  your life is who should you bow down to  and you might say no one that's not  exactly the right answer because that  means that you don't have an ideal  because you bow down to your ideal  that's what makes it an ideal and if you  don't have an ideal then what the hell  are you  do so you have to bow down to something  and so what happens here is well  the brothers are bowing down to the  person who's so bloody resilient and  competent that they can take themselves  out of a prison and become the ruler of  the land that happened to vaclav havel  right in czechoslovakia it also happened  to Mandela in South Africa like these  things actually happen it's really  something  so you god only knows what you might  learn in prison so so they bow down to  Joseph and properly so you know he's he  is even without his coat he's still the  person with the coat of many colors and  Joseph saw his brothers and he knew them  but he made them so strange unto them  it's a number of years have passed and  he spoke roughly unto them and he said  unto them where do you come from and  they said from the land of Canaan to buy  food and Joseph knew whose brothers were  but they didn't know who he was and they  came back to Jacob their father and told  him all that befell him and said the man  whose Lord of the country spoke roughly  to us and took us for spies  and we said to him where were true men  honest men we're not spies we be twelve  brothers sons of our fathers one is not  and the youngest is this day with our  Father in the land of Canaan and the man  said here's how I'll know that you're  honest men leave one of the brothers  here with me and take some food for the  famine of your households and be gone  and then bring your youngest brother to  me then I'll know that you're not spies  but that you're honest men and I'll  deliver the other brother and he shall  trade in the land so you don't have to  starve to death and it came to pass as  they emptied their sacks that behold  every man's bundle of money was in his  sock and when both they and their father  saw the bundles of money they were  afraid so  they had bought food from Joseph and he  gave them the food and then he put all  their money back and their socks which I  could imagine would worry them to some  degree and Jacob said me you have  already believed of my children Joseph  is not as Simeon is not now you'll take  Benjamin Benjamin away all these things  are against me and Reuben spake unto his  father saying slay my two sons if  bring him not to thee deliver him into  my hand and I will bring him to the  again and he and he said no my son shall  not go down with you for his brother is  dead and he's left alone if mischief  befall him by the way in the which you  shall go then you shall bring down my  great gray hairs with sorrow to the  grave now there's a hint see what  happens in the last part of the Jacob  storage the Joseph's story is and this  is associated with the idea of putting  your house in order your individual  house in order and then putting your  family's house in order let's say  reversed a little bit in this story  because Joseph puts himself together and  then he puts the state of Egypt in order  which is really quite interesting  because Egypt is the canonical tyranny  right in the Old Testament and so the  idea is very very clear here that the  person who wears the coat of many colors  can put the tyranny right and then the  next extension is well he has to put his  family right now you know generally the  progression would be put yourself right  then put your family right then put the  state right something like that it  doesn't really hit if you can do it in a  different order that's probably ok too  but so so that's what happens at the end  of the story is that you know Joseph is  doing pretty damn well and so is the  state that he serves but that isn't good  enough for him he wants his family to be  functional and put together properly  even though they did terrible things to  him and that's very interesting because  once someone does terrible things to you  then the logical thing or a logical  thing to think is well go to hell in a  handbasket you know like you deserve  exactly what you get but it's not a very  productive attitude especially if you're  around people that you have to be around  you know so like if it's your family and  you go have a family dinner and one of  you punches the other and then the other  punches you back and then that's like  the family dinner for the next thirty  years it doesn't seem to be very  productive even if you're the person who  happened to get in the last blow because  you're gonna have to put up with them at  minimum it might be nice to just let  what you can go go and work to make  towards making things better  have to get rid of the idea of revenge  and resentment and all those things that  you carry along but but it's probably  better to think about how your family  could be if it was really functioning  well and then just a money Ringley at  that no no that's not easy I mean people  are very screw in there's no end to the  depths of Pathology within families but  of course this story states that very  clearly I mean they tried to kill him  they've sold him into slavery it's it's  a pathological family let's put it that  way and but Joseph's attitude is well we  got to set this right not least because  of his father but it isn't only because  of his father as you see and as the  story unfolds and the famine was sore in  the land and it came to pass when they  had eaten up the corn which they had  brought out of Egypt their father said  unto them go again and buy us a little  food and Judah spake unto him saying the  man did solemnly protest unto us you not  see you will not see my face except your  brother be with you they can't go back  to Egypt without Benjamin and they said  the man asked us straightly of our state  and of her kindred saying is your father  yet alive have you another brother and  we told him according to the tenor of  those words could we know that he would  say bring your brother down and Judah  said unto Israel his father send the  loud with me and will arise and go that  we may live and not die both we and vow  and also our little ones I will be  surety for him my hand shall they'll  require him if I bring him not unto thee  and set them before thee then let me  bear the blame forever well so Judah who  played a pretty dismal role in the  original selling Joseph into slavery  seems to obviously have learned  something by this point since he's  willing to put himself on the line you  know to take responsibility for the  situation and to put himself on the line  and to stand in for Benjamin so he's  making himself into a sacrificial object  of sorts and so the game that  Joseph's playing cuz he's sort of  teasing his brothers but he's also  testing them the game that he's playing  is tuefel is one is have you bloody well  learned anything or are you just as  corrupt and useless as you were before  that's game number one in game number  two is maybe if I poke and prod you and  put you into a relatively difficult and  mysterious situation I can get you to  clue the hell in and the Dorp some  responsibilities and we can move this  whole mess forward and so that seems to  be happening so Judah is taking  responsibility and Reuben did that as  well and the men took presence and they  took double money in their hand and  Benjamin and rose up and went down to  Egypt and stood before Joseph and when  Joseph saw Benjamin with them he said to  the ruler of his house bring these men  home and slay and make ready food for  these men shall dine with me at noon and  the men man did as Joseph bade and the  man brought the men into Joseph's house  and when Joseph came home they brought  him the presents which was in their hand  and bowed themselves again to him to the  earth and he asked them of their welfare  and said is your father well the old man  of whom you spake is whom you spake is  he yet alive and they answered thy  servant our Father is in good health  he's yet alive and they bowed down their  heads and made obeisance and he lifted  up his eyes and saw his brother Benjamin  his mother's son and said is this your  younger brother of whom you spake unto  me and he said God be gracious unto thee  my son and Joseph made haste for his  bowels did yearn upon his brother and he  saw it where to weep and he entered into  his chamber and wept there and he washed  his face and went out and refrained  himself and said set on the bread and  they sat before them now he plays  another trick on his brother so he has  them all sit at the table but he lines  them up according to age and so he's  trying to what is he trying to do start  to freak them out fundamentally and so  it and he manages that because they have  no idea how in the world they could  possibly he could possibly pull  something like that off they think it's  magic and the men marvelled at one  another and he took and sent messes unto  them from before him but Benjamin's mess  was five times as much as any of theirs  so what's he doing  well he's testing his brothers again the  fact that when he was the child Joseph  that he got more meant that his brothers  got terribly jealous and then murderous  right and so now he's doing the same  thing with Benjamin he's thinking okay  well I'll give this kid more mm-hmm  then he is share you know what how these  reprobates behave and see if they've  learned anything and so and he commanded  the steward of his house saying fill the  men's sock with food as much as they can  carry and put every money man's money in  the sock as well and put my cup the  silver cup in the sacks mouth of the  youngest and his corn money and the  steward did according to the word that  Joseph had spoken as soon as the morning  was light the men were sent away along  with their transportation the cup is  found in Benjamin's sack well so  Benjamin is kind of young and Joseph  sends out people to find out where the  cup has gone and they find it in  Benjamin's in Benjamin's sock and  they're very upset about this they said  that a harsh punishment would befall  whoever had the cup in his sock they  rent their clothes and laid it every man  his house and returned to this city and  Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's  house for he was they yet there and they  fell before him on the ground  very unhappy and apologetic and Joseph  said unto them what deed is this that  you have done ha ha ha don't you know  that a man like I can certainly divine I  know what's going on and Judah said what  shall we say what shall we speak or how  can we possibly clear ourselves God  found out the iniquity of thy servants  behold we are your servants both we and  also he with whom the cup is found and  he said God forbid that I should do so  but the man in whose cup and whose hand  the cup has found he shall be my servant  and as for you get you up in peace to  your father it's the discovery of the  cup  Judis says now therefore when I come to  this servant thy father my father and  the loud be not with us and seeing that  his life is bound up in the lads life it  shall come to pass when he sees that the  lad is not with us that he will die and  the servants shall bring down the gray  hairs of thy servant or father with  sorrow to the grave for thy servant  became surety for the lad unto my father  saying if I bring him not unto thee then  I shall bear the blame to my father  forever now therefore I pray thee let me  stay instead of the lad and let the lad  go with his brothers for how shall I go  up to my brother and the loud be not  with me  lest peradventure I shall see the evil  that will come on my father ok so what's  happened well they learned a lesson  so now Judah again is willing to stand  in the place of Benjamin and become a  slave himself and so now Joseph has  determined that his brothers have  developed their character to the point  where reconciliation might be possible  you know it says you should forgive and  forget  but the conditions for that are quite  are quite specific you know if you're if  you have a dispute with someone and  they've wronged you in some sense and  they apologize the question is what's  the apology well it's a it's layout of a  rationale it's something like as far as  I can tell here's the reasons I did this  horrible thing and here's what I've  learned from it  and here's what I'm gonna do to try not  to do it again and would you give me  another crack at it that's the proper  repentance right and then you forgive  because you're an idiot too and you'll  probably do something stupid and maybe  you'd like the same kind of break at  some point and and besides if we all  held each other completely to account at  all possible times for everything then  it'd just be hopeless because there  would be no room for error  so the forgiveness which Joseph is  showing is wise forgiveness he's not  gonna put himself out on the line for  people who haven't learned so that the  same stupid thing can happen again so  that they can continue to spread misery  wherever they go  oh he's gonna find out if they've clued  in a little bit and then if so then they  can move on with putting a family  together and so that breaks him up he  says Joseph could not refrain himself  before all of them that stood by him and  he cried and then he said get every man  away from me so all the people except  for Joseph's brother left and there  stood no man with him well Joseph made  himself known unto his brothers and  Joseph said I'm Joseph is my father  still alive and his brothers could not  answer for they were troubled at his  presence it's like yeah understatement  of the decade there mmm  when Joseph said unto his brothers come  nearer to me I pray you and they came  nearer and he said I am Joseph your  brother who you sold into Egypt but  don't be grieved or angry with yourself  that you sold me hither for God did send  me before you to preserve life so now it  was not you that sent me here but God  and he's made me a father to Pharaoh and  Lord of all his house and a ruler  throughout all the land of Egypt  hurry and go to my father and say unto  Him thus say thy son Joseph God has made  me Lord of all GE gypped come down unto  me and Terry nod and thou shalt dwell in  the land of Goshen and thou shalt be  near unto me thou and thy children and  their children's children and thy flocks  and they herds and all that thou hast  and I there I will nourish you for yet  there are five years of famine lest thou  and I household and all that thou hast  come to poverty so that's the other  thing that another bit of a hint it's a  bread hint here who's the what's the  most reliable source of bread well it  isn't bread itself it's whatever it is  that gives rise to bread and that's what  Joseph is in this story he's the force  that gives ride rise to nourishment  that's an Joseph is often considered a  type of Christ which means like a  precursor in some sense that's that's  one way of thinking about it and you can  see that echoed right there it's like  well what do you store up  for famine you stir up character that's  the best way through now that doesn't  mean you don't also store up bread andd  they went out of Egypt and came into the  land of Canaan unto Jacob and told him  Josephus is still alive and he's  governor and Jacob's heart fainted for  he didn't believe them they told him all  the words of Joseph which he said to  them and when he saw all the wagons  which Joseph had sent to carry him the  spirit of Jacob their father revived and  Israel said it is enough Joseph my son  is yet alive I will go and see him  before I die and Israel took his journey  with all that he had and came to  Beersheba and offered sacrifices unto  the God of his father Isaac and God  spake unto Israel in the visions of the  night and said Jacob and he said here am  i he said I am God the God of thy father  don't fear to go to eat down into Egypt  for I will make you a great nation there  and so that's how they Israelites end up  in Egypt I will go down with the into  Egypt and I will also surely bring the  up again and Jacob shall put his hand  upon thy eyes die dies and Jacob rose up  from Beersheba and the sons of Israel  carried Jacob their father and their  little ones and their wives in the  wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry  him so the families now all united in  the proper state of being that joseph  has arranged and they took their cattle  and their goods it's so interesting too  because of course Joseph isn't even he's  a foreigner as well as being a former  slave and prisoner foreigner slave and  prisoner and yet he ends up ruling Egypt  sure surely because of the force of his  character and competence and that's  really something to think about and they  took their cattle because that story  there is that there isn't anything  stronger than that doesn't matter what  the circumstances are that there isn't a  force that's more powerful than that and  I don't think that that's naive in fact  I think it's the exact opposite of naive  no matter where you are you can  generally make things better if that's  what you want to do and unless you're  inside in that place that's really hell  itself not usually is something that  elevates you and elevates the people  around you and you can do that wherever  you are because there isn't a place that  sews  all that you can't do that that's the  message of the prison and they took  their cattle and their goods which they  had gotten in the land of Canaan and  came into Egypt Jacob and all his seed  with him and he sent Judah before him  unto Joseph to direct his face unto  Gorshin and they came into the land of  gaussian and Joseph made ready his  chariot and went to meet Israel his  father and presented himself to him and  fell on his neck and wept on his neck a  good while and Israel said I can now die  because I've seen your face because  you're still alive  and Pharaoh spake unto Joseph saying thy  father and thy brethren are come unto  thee and the land of Egypt is before  thee and the best of the land your  father and brothers can dwell in the  land of gaash and let them dwell and if  there now know any man of activity among  them then make them rulers over my  cattle gives them a job and Joseph  brought in Jacob is farther and set him  before Pharaoh and Jacob blessed Pharaoh  that's a very interesting little turn of  events because you'd expect the opposite  under those circumstances so it appears  that Jacob was a man of relatively great  self possession because that's not it  you wouldn't bless Queen Elizabeth in  all likelihood su had a lot of gall and  pharaoh said unto Jacob how old are you  and Jacob said I'm a hundred and thirty  years whew and evil have been the days  of the years of my life and I've not  attained unto the days of the years of  my love the life of my fathers in the  days of their pilgrimage Jacob blessed  the Pharaoh and went out from before  Pharaoh and Israel dwelt in the land of  Egypt in the country of Gaussian and  grew and multiplied exceedingly and  Jacob lived in the land of Egypt 17  years so the whole age of Jacob was 147  years and the time drew nigh that Israel  must die and he called his son Joseph  and said unto Him if I have now found  grace in it in thy sight put I pray thee  the hand under my thigh and deal kindly  and truly with me bury me not I pray  thee in Egypt but I will lie with my  fathers and thou shall carry me out of  Egypt and bury me in their burying place  and Joseph said I will do as you have  said  and it came to pass after these things  that one told Joseph behold thy father  is sick and he took with him his two  sons Manasseh and Ephraim and one told  Jacob and said behold thy son and one  told Jacob and said behold thy son  Joseph cometh unto thee and his real  strength in himself and sat upon the bed  and he Israel said unto Joseph I'd not  thought to see your face and lo God also  showed me your children and Joseph  brought them out from between his knees  and bowed himself with his face to the  earth and Joseph took them both Ephraim  in his right hand towards Israel's left  hand and menace' and his left hand  toward Israel's right hand and brought  them near unto Him and Israel stretched  out his right hand and laid it upon  ephram's head who was the younger and  his left hand upon manases head guiding  his hands purposefully for manna so was  the firstborn and when Joseph saw that  his father laid his right hand on the  head of Ephraim it displeased him and he  held up his father's hand to remove it  from Ephraim's head unto manases head  and joseph said unto his father not not  so my father for this is the firstborn  put the right hand upon his head head  and his father refused and said I know  it my son I know it he shall also become  a people and he shall also be great but  truly his younger brother shall be  greater than he and his seed shall  become a multitude of Nations another  repeat of the same thing that happens  continually it says when when God wants  to intervene in human affairs what he  does is invert tradition it's something  like that and so that's a sign that that  there's something new and special going  on and that gives precedence to the  younger child rather than the older  child precedents to what is new rather  than what's traditional of course  sometimes that's necessary because  tradition is insufficient and sometimes  something new has to come into being in  order to update it and Jacob called  together his sons and said gather  together so that I can tell you that  which shall befall you in the last days  gather yourself together and here you  sons of Jacob and hearken unto Israel  your father Reuben I'm not going to go  through all 12 of these Reuben thou art  my firstborn my might and the beginning  of my strength the excellency of dignity  and the excellency of power now the  stories  interesting here because Jacob blesses  Joseph's sons before he blesses his own  sons and so what he's doing is placing  the rights of the firstborn into the  sons of his favorite son and then he  goes to his sons and so that has  implications for the way the biblical  stories lay themselves out from  thenceforward the excellency of dignity  and the excellency of power unstable as  water thou shalt not excel because thou  wentest up to thy father's bed then  defiled it he went up to my couch you  may remember that Reuben slept with his  father's cucum concubine Simeon and Levi  are brethren instruments of cruelty are  in their habitations stop painting there  what happened with Simeon and Levi was  that somebody lay with their sister  Dinah and then offered to marry her and  then head and then became circumcised  because that was part of the deal and  then held her older men circumcised and  then Simeon and Levi went in when they  were recovering and killed them all and  then Jacob and all his people had to  leave because all that irritated their  relatives so see me Simeon and Levi are  brethren instruments of Cruelty are in  their habitations o my soul come not  thou into their secret unto their  assembly mine honor be not thou United  for in their anger they slew a man and  in their self self will they dig down a  wall cursed be their anger for it was  fierce and their route for it was cruel  I will divide them in Jacob and scatter  them in Israel Judah thou art he whom my  brethren shall praise thy hand shall be  in the neck of mine enemies thy father's  children shall bow down before thee  Judah is a lion's whelp from the prey my  son thou art gone up he stooped down he  couched as a lion and as an old lion who  shall rouse him up the scepter shall not  depart from Judah nor a lawgiver from  between his feet until shiloh come and  unto him shall the gathering of the  people be Joseph  a fruitful bough even a fruitful bough  by a well whose branch has run over the  wall the archers have sorely grieved him  and shot at him and hated him but his  bull abode in strength and the arms of  his hands were made strong by the hands  of the mighty God of Jacob for thence is  the shepherd the stone of Israel even by  the god of life farther who shall help  thee and by their almighty he shall  bless thee with the blessings of heavens  above blessings of the deep that lieth  under blessings of the beasts breasts  and of the womb the blessings of thy  father have prevailed above the  blessings of my progenitors unto the  utmost bound of the everlasting hills  they shall be on the head of Joseph and  on the crown of the head of him that was  separate from his brethren all these are  the twelve tribes of Israel and this is  it that their father spake unto them and  blessed them everyone according to his  blessing he blessed them so that what we  see here is an echo in some sense of  what happens in the Mesopotamian  creation story wind in the Mesopotamian  creation story is the dragon of chaos  timeout and her consort AB su freshwater  and saltwater respectively and their  mingled together and and that  combination of chaos and order gives  rise to the first Assembly of the  ancient gods and then the ancient gods  kill app soo casually and foolishly and  enraged time at with their foolishness  and ignorance and she comes back with a  vengeance in the meantime and then she  produces this huge army of monsters and  puts King knew the worst of the monsters  at its head and then decides she's going  to take out her creation and so that's a  little warning from 3,000 years ago  about foolishly undermining your  tradition so anyways the gods in their  frenzy go out and try to fight against  timeout and they come back with her  tails between their legs continually but  then a new God appears on the scene and  that's Marduk he's got eyes all the way  around his head and he can speak words  of magic and they know that there's  something new about this newest God it  his capacity for vision in this capacity  for articulate speech and so they say  well why don't you go out and try to  deal with the chaos and mardik says yeah  ok no problem but here's the deal you  elect me talk God and now I determine  the destiny of the world and so they're  desperate because like timeout is coming  to get them that's chaos with the worst  of all possible monsters they're  probably thinking he's not gonna win  anyways and so they agree and out he  goes and he confronts time out who's the  goddess of chaos he cuts her into pieces  and he makes the world out of her pieces  and one of his name's is he who makes  ingenious things out of the combat with  taya math which is so interesting that's  such a remarkable that's a remarkable  bit of nomenclature so who's should be  at the pinnacle the force that sees and  speaks and goes out to confront chaos  voluntarily you know how many years it  took people to figure that out that's  like the pinnacle discovery of humanity  that's what that is  it's echoed here you know you see Simeon  and Levi they're too angry the other  brothers they all have flaws and faults  of various sorts and so they're not  elevated to the highest place but Joseph  because he has his coat of many colors  and because he lands on his feet no  matter where he goes and because he's  not resentful and bitter and malevolent  and genocide 'el and and he's not  shaking his fist at the sky or yelling  at God because of Trump let's say then  he's the he's the right he's the right  representative of the 12 tribes and so  that's brilliant it's a brilliant story  all these are the twelve tribes of  Israel and this is it that their fathers  spake unto them and blessed them every  one according to his blessing he blessed  them and when Jacob had made an end of  commanding his son so it's the last  thing he does to state he knows that  these are the twelve tribes that will  progress into the future of this people  and now he's trying it the last thing he  does is to try to hierarchically  organized their relative virtues as an  indication of what has been learned  and when jacob has made an end of  commanding his sons he gathered up his  feet into the bed and yielded up the  ghost and was gathered unto his people  and joseph fell upon his father's face  and wept upon him and kissed him and  Joseph commanded his servants to the  physicians to embalm his father and the  physicians embalmed Israel when the days  of his mourning were passed Joseph spake  unto the house of Pharaoh saying if now  I have found grace in your eyes speak I  pray you in the ears of Pharaoh saying  my father made me swear saying lo I die  in my grave which I have digged for me  in the land of Canaan there shalt thou  bury me now therefore let me go up I  pray thee and bury my father and I will  come again and Pharaoh said go up and  bury thy father according as he made  thee swear for his sons carried him into  the land of Canaan and buried him in the  cave of the field of Machpelah which  Abraham bought with the field for a  possession of the burying place of  Ephraim the head  before Mamre and Joseph returned unto  Egypt he and his brethren and all that  went up to him and that all and all that  went up with him to burry his father  after he is buried after he had buried  his father and when Joseph's brethren  saw that their father was dead they said  Joseph will now hate us and will  certainly pay back to us all the evil  which we did unto him and they sent a  messenger saying my father did command  before he died saying for shall ye say  unto Joseph forgive I pray thee now the  trespass of thy brethren and their sin  pretty snively really for they did unto  the evil and now we pray they forgive  the trespass of the servants of the God  of thy father and Joseph wept when they  spake unto him and his brethren also  went and fell down before his face and  they said Behold we be thy servants and  Joseph said unto them fear not for am I  in the place of God but as for you you  thought evil against me but God meant it  unto good to bring to pass as it is this  day to save much people alive now  therefore fear ye not I will nourish you  and your little ones any comfort of them  and spake kindly unto them  so the the idea there is that there is  no evil so evil that good cannot triumph  over it and Joseph dwelt in Egypt he and  his father's house and Joseph lived 110  years and Joseph saw ephram's children  of the third generation the children  also of marker the son of menace' were  brought up upon Joseph's knees and  Joseph said unto his brethren I die and  God will surely visit you and bring you  out of this land unto the land where he  swear to Abraham to Isaac and Jacob and  Joseph took an oath of the children of  Israel saying God will surely visit you  and show and you shall carry my bones  from hence  so Joseph died being a hundred and ten  years old and they embalmed him and he  was put into a coffin in Egypt and  that's Genesis so  so thank you all for persevering   thank you thank you well this has been  very worthwhile as far as I'm concerned  I learned an awful lot and so I'm very  much looking forward to continuing with  it and thank you all very much for your  support and your rapt attention and your  seriousness in this endeavor and your  care and all of that it's really being a  privilege to be able to do this it's a  completely surreal thing to manage and  so far you know I think about five  million people have watched it so that  seems to be a very good thing  okay so I'm gonna ask the questioners if  you've asked a question in the last  three sessions please don't ask a  question today because I I never get  through everyone and so I'd like to have  some questions from people that I  haven't answered questions from before  if that's okay hi professor Peterson  just a 2-second thank you very much from  my community in the Jewish community so  many people have been inspired you by  you to be better people and I wouldn't  be able to speak to you without saying  that so thank you very much a couple of  things the first thing I wanted to do is  make a quick comment that you might find  interesting that in the Jewish  astrological calendar we read the  'really cycle of the the five books of  Moses and it just so happens that we are  reading this part of the of the Torah  story school and synchronistic yeah  which brings me into a question I want  to ask you about which is one question  with two parts about your knowledge of  Hebrew because if you look at the Torah  scrolls that you find in a synagogue  there are no vowels there are no  sentences there it is it is chaos chaos  and order is trying to be bought into it  I'm wondering how knowledge of you  knowledgeable are you of the Hebrew  which has many layers of I'm staggering  the ignorant of it so you know I read a  lot of commentaries right I'm trying to  zero in on the like with each of the  phrases that we went through today I  probably looked at ten different  commentaries and so and then I have this  underlying psychoanalytic knowledge that  it's sort of like if you have a bunch of  different templates to look at things  through and then something shines  through all those templates at the same  time that's very unlikely and so then  you can you know a coincidence is one  thing but five coincidences that's no  longer a coincidence that's something  else and so I think I'm hoping that  despite the fact that there's many many  things that I don't know that there's  enough things that I do know to kind of  weave my way through this with some  degree of utility if not certainty yeah  cuz I just which is the second part  which I guess maybe you don't know but  the the majestic the Jewish oral stories  that date back almost  as long as these stories which fill in a  lot of mind-blowing ly crazy random so  many details about these stories and I  was just wondering if you had  encountered any of them before I've  encountered some of them but again it's  it's well as you know it's a very very  rich tradition and so I haven't  encountered enough of it  were you thinking of anything in  specific specifically in relationship to  this story not in particular I actually  forgot it I was I was intending to bring  you a book of majestic story that's a  hell of a thing to say now to say that  but yeah maybe for the exodus version  I'll bring you this all right all right  that would be good yeah okay  hi dr. Peterson I would just like to ask  you to please talk about what you called  a psychic death also known as an ego  death okay sorry say that again would  you please talk about what you refer to  as a psychic death also called an ego  death that's what happens when someone  who loves you betrays you right so  imagine that like the world is  complicated beyond comprehension  right and you only see a very little bit  of it and the way you structure your  understanding is you make assumptions  about things and they're simplifying  assumptions so if you trust someone you  reduce their complexity massively right  because like let's say we were married  then there's a whole bunch of ways that  you're going to act that are going to be  simpler okay so then I can tolerate  being around you in some sense because  you're not everything at once  now those simplifying structures are  hierarchically assembled and some of  them are far more important than others  Trust is one of them especially trust in  loved ones family members which is why  betrayal by a family member is really  catastrophic because it you know it  destabilizes your past right all the  memories you have it destabilizes your  present it destabilizes your future it  shakes your faith in human beings  including yourself and everything  collapses and that's an ego death  and so now underneath the ego as far as  Jung was concerned was another structure  that he called the self and the self is  the thing that remains constant across  ego deaths but it's it's deeper and less  personal  it's archetypal and it's the thing that  the Eagle collapses into when it  collapses and then that rebuilds the ego  something like that across time but  that's when an ego death is now there's  variants of that because you can have a  voluntary or involuntary ego death and a  voluntary ego death is when you learn a  bunch and you're willing to let go so  that would be your own emulation it's  like you're lighting you're a Phoenix  and your lighting yourself on fire  that's a much better idea even though it  can still be really harsh the  involuntary ego deaths they're really  hard on people people will do almost  anything to stop that from happening  which is partly why they fight to  maintain their group fostered axiomatic  simplifications it's not surprising  because it's very you'd lose your like  that ego death is a journey into the  underworld or it's a collapse into chaos  and that's not so bad if you do it  purposefully but in the Pinocchio story  for example that's exemplified by  Pinocchio going down to the depths to  rescue his father from the whale now he  does that voluntarily but a damn near  kills it right I mean first of all he  hardly gets out of the whale second he  actually drowns and dies but he comes  back to life so even if you do it  voluntarily it's still life it's just  better than doing it involuntarily  which is the other alternative so that's  what it is you bet hello Doctor Buddhism  so I've been listening to back to all of  these biblical lectures for the second  time now and I wanted to show you an  observation I came upon because I was  trying to find a question that you  haven't been asked before which is  harder than doing my ryerson exams  that's for sure  so so I've noticed I think you're  getting funnier oh yes oh no I think  Michael Coren said that this week I  think but the word he used was bizarre I  think actually I'm feeling better so  that's I actually have a sense of humor  it's it's hard to believe that but so it  sort of comes back when I'm not feeling  like I'm going to die at any moment so  yeah I basically noticed one you're  making more attempts at jokes so that's  great thank you thank you too those  jokes are landing more often all right  but then there's this third element  which I think was what Steve Martin quit  because of which is that I think the  audience is anticipating jokes more and  they're actually you know I've noticed  people laughing more at things that  aren't intending to be jokes so I was  just wondering what you make of that and  they're intended I'm hoping they're  intended just because I keep a straight  face doesn't mean they're not intended  to be jokes so yeah no it's good look  one of the things is like it's and I try  to keep this and the wild goal probably  about five years ago that even when  you're dealing with really serious  matters that if you're not handling it  with a light touch you're not an expert  at it you know what a master out it and  you think well there are some things  that are so deep and dark that you can't  handle it with a light touch and that's  actually not true you can that doesn't  mean you make light of them it doesn't  mean anything like that it's that you  don't it's minimal necessary force it's  something like that you don't hit it any  harder than you have to and it's a it's  an art when you're discussing serious  matters and so well one of the up shots  of that is that because we're discussing  serious Madison because serious matters  are being discussed in the ultra large  right now it would be really good if  everybody could keep their sense of  humor you know and I see positive signs  of that like there's a lot of satirical  activity on the net you know and that  could easily catalyze into horror mob  but it isn't it is it is you know that's  happening to some degree but a lot of  its satire in comedy and as long as we  can keep a sense of humor about this  then I think well  we're not as close to disaster as we  might be and so what one of the things  that I have found rather ominous is that  there are comedians first of all being  persecuted for under free speech  restriction legislation which i think is  absolutely appalling but also that there  are comedians now who won't perform on  university campuses John Cleese won't  Seinfeld that's like well you know how  offensive he is it's no wonder that I  mean he's like the straightest nicest  comedian you could possibly imagine he  won't perform on college campuses I  think louis c.k won't perform on or  anywhere else but it's a bad sign but no  humor humor is good and it's interesting  because I've been kind of watching how  I'm represented on the web weirdly  enough and there's all these memes that  have emerged I don't know thousands of  the bloody things and most of them are  comical and that's good like people are  are there hat there whatever it is that  they're doing I don't know what the hell  it is but it's being done with a  relatively light touch and that's really  really good  that's how it should be you got to have  a sense of humor I mean it's one of the  things that makes life bearable so or  maybe even better than bearable so you  bet  hello dr. Peterson just want to say what  a great lecture series and this is  lesson this year so merry Christmas to  you and your family thank you thank you  don't get too enthusiastic about that I  wrote you an essay of a question and  then I used the lecture of the essay  writing guide on it's like 2:30 to  narrow it down to just a few pages a few  lines and then during this at this  particular lecture like the zig zag  slide manifest again and I thought I  basically just had all my questions  answered so basically I just I want to  ask the idea of your you've made a  lecture that was on YouTube many years  ago and you keep referring to Cain and  Abel and the the death of Abel by Cain  and the curse in it and I think well  that that was the that was a single  brother two brothers conflict but but  here we have in the sense of Jacob the  twelve there was one who was one who's  good one who was an able archetype and  there were twelve eleven that came after  him so that I don't know maybe there's  something about the division or no  that's a good observation I didn't  thought about that  yeah well I mean there's a bit of  variability because Reuben and Reuben  isn't quite as bad as the rest but yeah  I would say it's probably easier for the  Cain side to multiply luckily it's not  as powerful because it doesn't do  anything like it yes yes and you know  you know there's young was often  included accused of manichaean isn't I'm  not pronouncing that properly but there  was a there was a variant of Christian  dogma that held that good and evil were  separate metaphysical realities and that  they were battling for the for  governance of the cosmos something like  that but they both had an independent  and the classical Christian idea which  one out over that was that no that good  was real but evil was the absence of  good now that produced all sorts of the  absence of good produces all sorts of  consequences and it is interesting to  read young because he does get kind of  Manichean in his discussions and I think  it was partly because he was so  concerned about what happened in Nazi  Germany and then with cold war  afterwards you know because evil seemed  to be a palpable force but I don't think  that it's as powerful as good but I do  think it's easier for it to multiply  because it's what's easier path it's  easy to be resentful and hostile and  bitter and and do nothing that's easy  it's horrible and it's hard on people  but it doesn't require a tremendous  amount of faith or effort so maybe that  is why it's multiplied in the final  story in Genesis yeah and I've been  reading ahead and for my own based on  the interest of the president presented  stories and I I keyed in on a few other  books and chapters in the Bible like  first Corinthians 13 which is the love  chapter and that cycles through the idea  of I can have all things in life  knowledge power but it's all passing and  now and forever our hope faith hope and  love and and of course love triumphs  over all yeah well the love issue see  I've been saying I thought a lot about  the relationship between love and truth  because I've thought and talked a lot  more about truth and I think partly  that's because love is a word that you  can hardly even say because it's been so  it's like it's being dragged behind a  car through mud puddles it's something  like that but so sorry let me just  finish it lab rating this idea but I  think that the the love idea is  associated with for me at least with  what I discussed at the beginning of  this lecture with regards to faith I  think you have to make a decision about  what your attitude towards being is  going to be and the proper attitude in  my estimation is that you're working for  its betterment you know and so maybe  maybe you have the same attitude towards  being as you do  towards someone that you love like a son  or a daughter or wife that you want  things to be better and that so that's  your aim so the aim is basically the aim  is motivated by love you want things to  be better because I think that's a good  definition of love like if you really  care for someone you can tell because  you want things to be better for them  and then I think truth is nested inside  that because I think that truth is the  best servant of love it's something like  that so I've been struggling with an  idea recently that I was thinking maybe  you'd be able to help me out with  basically in a recent interview you  talked about how myth is meant to  reconcile inherent contradictions in  reality right but but I'm sort of stuck  between two mythological or  psychoanalytic ideas that I think are  both really important but they seem to  have a inherent contradiction within  them that I've been trying to figure out  so on one hand you have this idea that  there's times in your life where you  have to identify things in yourself that  are insufficient or there's a problem  somehow that you have to kind of have a  controlled burn or like a Phoenix like  transformation where you discard part of  yourself that doesn't fit or is not  working but then on the other hand you  have talked about this this Union idea  where as you become really when you get  older you mature by reincorporating  things about yourself that you lost when  you were younger or that you know you're  trying to integrate your shadow or  you're trying to find parts of your  personality that that maybe you've been  rejecting and trying to figure out how  to bring them into into the folder in  the hole so he's got this quote that I  really like which is I'd rather behold  and good right right so so on one hand  you may identify something as a problem  and you want to get rid of it or burn it  off but then on the other hand it seems  like the the path to being stronger is  to figure out how to put everything  together so there's that there's a one  of the things Jung wrote about in his  works on alchemy was  an explanation of the prime alchemical  dictum which was solve a coagula which  meant dissolve and integrate right so so  imagine this imagine that imagine you  had a fairly hostile father who was not  very well controlled in his aggression  decent person other than that but let's  say that and so your reaction is I'm  never going to be aggressive and so  you've built a like a moral structure  that's part of your personality and  there's possibility floating around  outside of that did you you've denied an  ethical you've denied any ethical what  would you say you've stripped the idea  of aggression of any ethical utility  whatsoever okay so what happens this  burns off and then that comes back up  now you still have to integrate it so  it's associated in some sense with  Nietzsche's ideas morality as cowardice  because one of nature's most trenchant  critiques of traditional morality let's  say is that most of what passes for  morality isn't morality it's just  cowardice it's not that I'm a good  person and I don't hurt you it's that  I'm afraid to hurt you and because I  don't want to admit that I'm afraid to  hurt you and then I say I'm moral  because then I can mask my essential  fear and cowardice in a guise of  morality and that happens far more often  than you would think because harmless  and moral are by no means the same thing  so some of what you're burning off you  can sit and this is where Freud was such  a genius I think is because he  concentrated on aggression and sexuality  which are perhaps the two most difficult  parts of a personality to integrate said  that the the hyper simp  fied morality stops you from tapping  into deeper recesses of your psyche and  it's partly because there are primal  forces it's not surprising that you  don't want to have anything to do with  them that you stay away from situations  where they might make themselves  manifest but the problem is by denying  the worst in yourself in that manner  suppressing it you preclude the  possibility of the best because no one  can be a good person without integrating  their capacity for aggression because  without that capacity of a progression  you cannot say no because no means if  you really say it no means there isn't  anything that you can do to me that will  make me change my mind or or conversely  it means I will play for higher stakes  than you will and unless you've got your  aggression integrated there isn't a  chance you can say that and if you did  no one would take you seriously because  they'd know it was just a show so one of  the most useful things that Jung did I  think was to work on this idea of the  integration of the shadow because he was  really interested in the idea of evil  right especially working with trying to  parcel out what happened in Nazi Germany  and during the Second World War  what do you do with the part of you  that's aggressive and and potentially  malevolent do you just crush it that's  the super-ego response in some sense do  you just put it behind you so to speak  is that a possibility or do you admit to  its existence and bring it into the game  and that's see for Freud in some sense  morality was super-ego clamping down on  the it'd and they were fundamentally  opposed both young and Piaget had a  different idea and I think they were  right it's like no no you invite the bad  guys out to play and so you're an  aggressive hockey player but it's  disciplined aggression that makes you  gives you access to the whole source of  energy you wouldn't otherwise have and  then with regards to sexuality it's like  well untrammeled promiscuity doesn't  constitute a virtue but neither does  unavoidable virginity right in fact I  think that's worse because it also masks  itself with virtue it's like well you  should be able to  you should be able to do things that you  wouldn't do that's that's like the  definition of a genuinely moral person  they could do it but they don't and that  that's not cowardice and so that's you  burn off the things that get in the way  of that integration so when you say  dissolve and integrate it'd be a good  way to sort of bring the two ideas  together that the burning off and the  difficult process is necessary because  the elements of yourself are structured  together in a rigid way that is not  working properly and that's what happens  to Geppetto in the belly of the whale  he's so caught in his presuppositions  that he can't escape right and so  Pinocchio represents the new force so  it's very interesting so when you watch  Pinocchio try to rescue him the first  thing Geppetto does is confuse Pinocchio  with a fish because he wants something  to eat but Pinocchio is better than  something to eat because he could rescue  him so he doesn't need to eat and then  Pinocchio wants to make a fire in  Geppetto objects because he's gonna burn  up all the furniture it's like we don't  need the damn furniture if we're getting  out of the whale you know and so so  Geppetto and and he's old so that that  that's that that's the rigid structure  that's the old year that has to die off  before the new year can be born it's a  forest fire that allows for new growth  and and that's how those things are put  together and to see and it's useful to  know too because if you burn something  off you might think well there's nothing  left it's like that's not true if it's  dead wood then you have room for new  growth and you want to be doing that on  a fairly regular basis that's the that's  that's the snake that sheds its skin and  transforms itself right that's that's  the death and resurrection from a  psychological perspective it's exactly  the same idea now we don't know the  upper limit to that right because we  don't know what a person would be like  if they let everything that they could  let go let go and only let in what was  seemly let's say but you can see that's  funny we don't know that to some degree  you can see people vary from you can see  people start to do that without that's  not an rare experience  and people improve very rapidly they can  improve their lives very rapidly a lot  of its low-hanging fruit like if you  just stop doing really stupid things  that you know are stupid your life  improves a lot so and it frees you up it  also means there's a there's an element  there that's also associated with pride  because people tend to take pride in who  they are and that's a bad idea because  that stops you from becoming who you  could be because if you're proud of who  you are  you won't let that go when it's  necessary you won't step away from it  you know and then you end up being your  own parody something like that that's  also a very bad idea you want to be  continually stepping away from your  previous self and so big and I guess  part of that too is that you you have to  decide you know are you are you order or  you chaos or you the process that  mediates between them and if you're the  process that mediates between them you  you are the thing that transforms and  that's the right attitude for human  being because that's what we are we're  the thing that voluntarily confronts  chaos and transforms that's what we are  and so for better or worse you know  that's our deepest biological essence  you might say and so you can let things  go if you know that there's more growth  to come so  one more thank you for your time and  thank you for spending time with us hey  my pleasure so if I could since we are  at the end of Genesis I like the  opportunity to challenge or at least  have you take another look at your  position you've held with regards to  Cain's reflection on the murder of evil  I bring this up because it's actually a  part of Genesis that has bothered me for  a while and it's not like because not as  straightforward as its presented usually  and it's really I've been wrestling with  it so in this series as well as in a  couple of your maps of meaning lectures  you summarized that something to the  effect of Cain coming to the conclusion  that what he did leads to a punishment  which is more than he believes he can  face which I believe to be born out of a  natural reading of a specific  translation choices incorrectly made or  enter a innocently made by editors just  for readability sake so in Genesis 4:13  Cain does not say my punishment is  greater than I can bear he actually says  he meets my sin is greater than I can  bear which is this a.m. which is to say  it's not his past actions we just say  it's not his past sections its futures  consequences which it's just past action  it's not his future consequences which  he regrets for him to say our own  iniquity or sin that is too much for him  to bear as a reflection on the reality  of his corruption and not a plea of  Mercy to the deity to spare him mmm okay  well that's that seems to be a deeper  interpretation I would say and I think  it's more that's the same line of  reasoning that Dostoevsky pursued in  crime and punishment right because in  crime and punishment Raskolnikov gets  away with murder and then he cannot  stand it he cannot stand that he did it  because he's no longer the same person  but even more he cannot stand that he  got away with it  so that's more in keeping with with that  interpretation so this also is reflected  in the falling verse and 4:14 where he  states the consequences of his actions  mainly that God's presence will hot be  hidden from him and that he will be  killed the verse opens was the word hane  which means indeed more or less  and to note the sense of acceptance and  not a complaint it is the difference  between saying oh no well God now hide  his face from me and will I be hunted  versus of course God will hide his face  for me and I will be hunted and killed  which I've been wrestling with and I've  taken a way to possibly mean that there  are sins that we can do that will just  push us too far well okay there there  there are well okay so one of the well  one of the things that you see in  post-traumatic post-traumatic stress  disorder situations for example is that  people view themselves doing something  so terrible they don't know how to put  it right so that and so you could say  under those circumstances the face of  God is hidden from them because they  cannot they cannot atone for it they  can't reconcile themselves to it it's  there all the time and they can't see  anything good beyond it it's hell  essentially and so I mean sometimes when  you're working with people with  post-traumatic stress disorder you know  you you kind of in initiate them into a  philosophy of good and evil so that they  can see when Joseph talks to his  brothers and they've got all this guilt  right and and he doesn't want them to  have more guilt than necessary to fix  themselves because it just burdens them  otherwise he says look don't forget yeah  yeah it was you but it's also God's  doing and I had a client once who who  had obsessive-compulsive disorder and  he's a very smart guy he also happened  to work in a radioactive lab that had a  lot of radioactive materials which  wasn't the best place for someone with  OCD and he was worried that he would  make some mistake this is very common  with OCD that would result in someone's  suffering which you will you'll do that  and it wasn't until I could get him to  conceptualize himself and his life in  part as a force of nature that he was  able to reconcile himself to the  possibility that an error on his part  would produce catastrophic consequences  but people often find themselves in  situations where they just they cannot  reconcile themselves to what they've  done and that it makes sense to me that  that the interpretation that you're  describing that  that makes them that makes plenty of  sense from a psychological perspective  there are sins that will push us like  just beyond our limit that are too far  but there are also no consequences to  our actions that are devoid of a truth  we can accept and learn from and this is  what I've kind of dealt out of this bit  with Cain and Abel so if this is the  case why then does it take us so long  and with so much self - now before we  accept personal responsibility when  faced with tragedy especially when it's  self inflicted well I I don't think you  want to underestimate the contribution  of just sheer difficulty like you know  let's say you you you you're grieving  because someone close to you died it's  like well it isn't just that you've lost  them although that's a big part of it  it's that you have to rebuild yourself  and it's really hard to do that so and  it is sort of proportional to the  significance of your error so if you  commit an error and then you recognize  that it's an error if it's a sort of  surface error it's like well you can  just touch up the paint but sometimes  the whole under structure is just rotten  and then you don't know what to do and  then so that's one problems just sheer  bloody difficulty and I see this with  people very often it's like they're at a  point in their divorce let's say and  they don't know what to do they cannot  solve the problem it's too complicated  they just don't have the resources and  maybe they've squandered some of their  resources as well but sometimes they  just don't have the resources and then  if you add to that error and sin and  malevolence and blindness and all those  other things people there's a guy named  Thomas SAS who wrote this really  interesting article in the 1960s a book  actually called the myth of mental  illness and it was classic reading for  clinical psychologists when I was  training and the reason for that was is  that SAS pointed out and this is true is  that mmm-hmm lots of times if you're a  psychotherapist people don't come to you  because they have mental illnesses they  had come to you because they have  insoluble  problems in their life you know like  maybe they've had a two-year affair at  work their wife is alcoholic and they  have a very and their father has  Alzheimer's disease it's like they just  don't know what to do it's too much now  you know they shouldn't have had the  affair so there's a moral issue and  maybe they should have intervened in the  alcoholism in the family maybe they used  their wives alcoholism as an excuse to  have the affair you know like these  things get very tangled it's just it's  so bloody complicated that people can't  untangle it so and I would say that's in  keeping with the interpretation that you  laid forth with regards to cain is it  sounds like that's one of the reasons  why it's so useful to read multiple  translations right because nuances  matter it sounds to me from that  description that he actually woke up at  least briefly and noticed what he did  and said there's no coming back from  this and and it is you can easily get  places that you do not know how to come  back from now you know they say well all  things are possible with God and there's  always the possibility of redemption no  matter how serious the sin but I'll tell  you sometimes people have no idea how to  get back from where they went well and  you can understand often why people  wouldn't do that right yeah well that's  a funny thing because one of the things  Carl Rogers said too about psychotherapy  is that you can't do psychotherapy with  someone who hasn't recognized that they  have a problem so that it's a massive  thing to recognize that you have a  problem and it does open the door  perhaps to recovery but it also means  that you've recognized that you have a  problem and that can be very very it's  the desert right you're out of the  tyranny but you're in the desert and the  sun's beating down on you and there's no  necessary reason to presume that you're  going to survive so think you have  goodnight and stay thank you all  you